Predicting risky choices from brain activity patterns

Sarah M. Helfinsteina,1, Tom Schonberga, Eliza Congdonb,c, Katherine H. Karlsgodtd,e, Jeanette A. Mumfordf,
Fred W. Sabbb,c,g, Tyrone D. Cannonh,i, Edythe D. Londonb,c,g,j, Robert M. Bilderb,c,g,k, and Russell A. Poldracka,f,l

aImaging Research Center, and Departments of fPsychology and lNeuroscience, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712; Departments of bPsychiatry
and Biobehavioral Sciences, jMolecular and Medical Pharmacology, and kPsychology, gBrain Research Institute, and cSemel Institute, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095; dDepartment of Psychiatry, Zucker Hillside Hospital, Queens, NY 11004; eFeinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY
11030; and Departments of hPsychology and iPsychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520

Edited by Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, and approved December 11, 2013 (received for review November 20, 2013)

Previous research has implicated a large network of brain regions
in the processing of risk during decision making. However, it has
not yet been determined if activity in these regions is predictive of
choices on future risky decisions. Here, we examined functional
MRI data from a large sample of healthy subjects performing
a naturalistic risk-taking task and used a classification analysis
approach to predict whether individuals would choose risky or
safe options on upcoming trials. We were able to predict choice
category successfully in 71.8% of cases. Searchlight analysis
revealed a network of brain regions where activity patterns were
reliably predictive of subsequent risk-taking behavior, including
a number of regions known to play a role in control processes.
Searchlights with significant predictive accuracy were primarily
located in regions more active when preparing to avoid a risk than
when preparing to engage in one, suggesting that risk taking may
be due, in part, to a failure of the control systems necessary to
initiate a safe choice. Additional analyses revealed that subject
choice can be successfully predicted with minimal decrements in
accuracy using highly condensed data, suggesting that informa-
tion relevant for risky choice behavior is encoded in coarse global
patterns of activation as well as within highly local activation
within searchlights.
fMRI | machine learning | decision-making
In daily life, we are regularly confronted with decisions that

require choosing between a risky option and a safe one. The
safe option typically has a single known outcome, whereas the
risky option has multiple possible outcomes, some positive and
some negative. Some of these decisions, such as choosing whether
to drive while intoxicated or experiment with drugs, can have
serious consequences for health and well-being, yet it is poorly
understood what leads us to choose these risky courses of action
over their safer alternatives.

Although many studies have examined the neural correlates of
risk taking (1–4), most, but not all (5, 6), have used experimental
paradigms that utilize the economic definition of risk as variance
in outcomes. As has been observed elsewhere (7), lay people
generally conceive of risk not as variance in outcomes but as
exposure to negative outcomes, and real-world risk-taking be-
havior is only weakly related to performance on variance-based
risk-taking tasks (7, 8).

To examine the cognitive processes at work while making risky
decisions in a way that relates to real-world risk taking, we used
the Balloon Analog Risk Task (BART) (9), in which subjects
receive points as they pump up balloons but risk losing those
points should the balloon explode before they choose to stop
pumping and “cash out.” Each pump opportunity is a risky de-
cision, where subjects must choose whether to pump again to
gain more points or to cash out to secure those points already
accrued. The structure of the task, where subjects make se-
quential risky choices with feedback, is common to many real-
world risk-taking situations (10) and matches both the economic
and lay definition of risk, in that each successive pump oppor-
tunity for a given balloon has both greater variance in possible
outcomes and increased exposure to loss. Performance on this

task has also been shown, in numerous behavioral studies, to re-
late to self-reported sensation seeking (9, 11) and to naturalistic
risk-taking behaviors, such as smoking, drug use, sexual risk-
taking, and unsafe driving behaviors (9, 11–14). Because per-
formance on this task consistently correlates with naturalistic
risk-taking behaviors, the cognitive processes at work during the
task are likely to be comparable to those used during real-world
risky decision making.

In addition to the focus on the neural correlates of economic
risk, much previous research has emphasized how brain activity
changes when levels of risk or related constructs, such as ambi-
guity, uncertainty, or variance, are manipulated. A large network
of regions that are sensitive to risk has been identified, including
the insula, frontal cortices, striatum, cingulate cortex, thalamus,
and parietal lobes (1–6, 15–18). However, these studies have left
a related question largely unaddressed: When confronted with
a decision with a given amount of risk, what key differences in
neural activity predict whether the subject will go on to make the
risky or safe choice? Identifying the regions that differentiate
between these two outcomes when the objective amount of risk is
the same is critical to understanding risky decision making, be-
cause these regions are the ones where the information encoded
is most likely to influence the decision-making process. By ex-
amining the functionality of these regions, we can then infer the
types of information and cognitive processes most likely to shape
the outcome of the risky decision. Previous studies (15, 19–23)
have examined differences in activation on trials where subjects
made either risky or safe choices; however, due to the tight tem-
poral coupling between the making of the decision and the sub-
sequent anticipation of its outcome, it is difficult to determine
whether those differences precede and influence the decision or,
instead, reflect differences in anticipation of the outcomes of risky
or safe choices that occur after the decision has been made.

Significance

Previous studies have examined the neural correlates of risk,
but it is unknown if patterns of brain activity can predict
choices in risky decision-making. We used functional MRI data
to predict choice behavior in subjects while they performed
a naturalistic risk-taking task. We found choices on subsequent
trials could be predicted with high accuracy when condensing
each individual’s brain activity to two values, indicating that
choice behavior is encoded even in coarse activation patterns.
A searchlight analysis demonstrated that choices can also be
predicted based on localized activity patterns within neural net-
works involved in cognitive control. These regions show greater
activation prior to safe choices than risky choices, suggesting that
control systems play a key role in inhibiting risky choices.

Author contributions: F.W.S., T.D.C., E.D.L., R.M.B., and R.A.P. designed research; E.C., K.H.K.,
and F.W.S. performed research; S.M.H., T.S., E.C., J.A.M., and R.A.P. analyzed data; and
S.M.H., T.S., and R.A.P. wrote the paper.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: shelfins@austin.utexas.edu.

2470–2475 | PNAS | February 18, 2014 | vol. 111 | no. 7

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1321728111

D
N
A

L
A
C
I
G
O
L
O
H
C
Y
S
P

S
E
C
N
E
I
C
S

E
V
I
T
I
N
G
O
C

To determine the brain regions where neural activity is directly
related to the subsequent choice to take or abstain from risk, we
performed a classification analysis on functional MRI data from
trials immediately preceding either risky or safe choices to de-
termine whether a machine-learning algorithm could use the
data successfully to learn to predict the category to which a given
data sample belonged. We used data from trials preceding either
risky or safe choices, rather than data from risky or safe choice
trials themselves, because trials preceding both risky and safe
choices were always successful risky choices due to the structure
of the BART task. Because subjects made identical choices and
received identical outcomes on trials preceding both risky and
safe choices, using data from these trials ensured that any effects
of motoric response or anticipation of outcome would be identical
for both conditions, allowing us to determine which brain regions
encode information that is predictive of the upcoming decision.
To ensure that any predictive validity held across individuals,
we collected data from a large number of subjects and used a
between-subject cross-validation strategy in which safe and risky
choice trials were matched on the amount of risk and potential
loss. Our goal was first to establish whether neural encoding on
trials preceding either a risky or safe choice was sufficiently
distinctive that it could be used to predict subsequent subject
behavior. After establishing this was the case, our second goal
was to determine which regions of the brain encoded in-
formation that was most predictive of choice, using a searchlight
analysis. Third, we wanted to establish whether prediction relied
exclusively on information from local clusters of highly in-
formative voxels that could be identified in searchlight analyses
or if a coarse encoding of information across large portions of
the brain was also sufficient to predict subject choice. To test
this, we extracted mean activation from regions that were more
active before a cash out than before a pump and mean activation
from regions more active before a pump than before a cash out,
and used these two averaged values alone to predict subject choice.

Results
Behavioral Data. One hundred eight participants completed an
average of 18.03 experimental balloons (SD = 3.02) and, of
those, cashed out on 11.01 (SD = 3.44). They pumped an average
of 3.889 times (SD = 0.958) per balloon across all experimental
balloons and 4.438 times (SD = 1.375) on balloons that ended in
a cash out. Only those pump events preceding a cash out that
could be matched with a pump event preceding another pump at
the same level of risk were included in the classification analyses,
yielding an average of 7.519 (SD = 2.797) useable pre-cash out
events per subject. For those events included, reaction times
were 689.2 ms (SD = 547.6 ms) for pre-cash out events and 546.3
ms (SD = 252.9 ms) for prepump events (significant difference:
t107 = 3.08, P = 0.003).

Functional MRI Data. Our first objective was to identify whether
the brain states preceding risky and safe choices were sufficiently
unique to be discriminable. To that end, we trained a support
vector machine classification algorithm using sixfold cross-vali-
dation to classify between mean activation maps for trials that
immediately preceded a decision to cash out (i.e., safe choices)
vs. maps for trials that immediately preceded a decision to
continue inflating the balloon (i.e., risky choices) (Fig. 1). Cross-
validation was performed across individuals; the classifier was
trained on five-sixths of the subjects (90 of 108) and then applied
to the remaining subjects to discriminate between trials that
preceded risky vs. safe choices. To ensure against variability due
to fold assignment, this was performed 50 times with random
fold assignment and the results were averaged. We used trials
that immediately preceded the decision rather than the decision-
making trial itself to ensure that the classifier would not be able
to discriminate between trials based on motor or reward effects,

Fig. 1. Sample trials from the BART task. On each balloon, subjects made
successive choices about whether to pump or cash out. They earned five
points for each pump made before cashing out; however, if the balloon
exploded before they cashed out, no points were earned for that balloon.
Thus, each pump opportunity represented a risky decision where the subject
could choose a certain, safe option (cash out) or an uncertain, risky option
(pump). Trials boxed in blue indicate trials suitable for classification analysis;
trials are matched for level of risk and subject choice on the trial but differ
on subject choice on the subsequent trial. Note that although many “pre-
pump” trials are present in the figure, only the boxed prepump trial was
selected because it has the same level of risk as the paired “pre-cash out” trial.

which differ at the time of the actual decision. Trials in each
category were matched for the number of pumps the subject had
made on that balloon before the trial of interest, so that all
variables were equated across choice conditions. Prepump and
pre-cash out events were modeled with variable epoch regressors
to control for effects of reaction time differences between the
two conditions (24). Thus, any differences seen between trials
preceding risky and safe choices could only be attributed to
subjects’ cognitive processing on these trials, rather than to dif-
ferences in the objective features of the trials themselves or the
length of time spent engaging in cognitive processing.

Overall, the classifier was effective at discriminating between
maps associated with risky (preceding a pump) and safe (pre-
ceding a cash out) trials: Using a whole-brain classifier, we were
able to classify activation maps correctly as either risky or safe
71.8% of the time. The statistical significance of this accuracy
was assessed nonparametrically by randomizing labels within sub-
jects and performing the analysis 500 times to obtain an empirical
null distribution. The maximum accuracy across all runs included
in the null distribution was 67%; thus, the observed accuracy of
the classification was significant at P < 0.002.

Next, we identified the regions of the brain where activity was
most predictive of risky vs. safe choices. To identify these regions,
we conducted a searchlight analysis (25), which revealed several
regions where classification ability was significantly better than
chance, including bilateral parietal and motor regions, anterior
cingulate cortex, bilateral insula, and bilateral lateral orbito-
frontal cortex (OFC) (Fig. 2 and Table 1). To establish the cog-
nitive functions in which these regions were most involved, we
conducted a formal reverse inference analysis using NeuroSynth
(26), correlating our searchlight map with the neural activation
maps for each term in the NeuroSynth database. Results (Table 2)
revealed that the regions identified in searchlight analyses are
involved in control processes, indicating that control networks
function in systematically different ways before risky vs. safe choices.

Helfinstein et al.

PNAS | February 18, 2014 | vol. 111 | no. 7 | 2471

and “safe choice” regions provides unique information that aids
in classification. We confirmed this by performing classifications
using only one mean at a time. We found that classification using
only the mean of risky > safe regions (56.7%) or the mean of
safe > risky regions (59.0%) was significantly worse than the
joint classification (risky > safe vs. both: t98 = 58.2, P < 0.001;
safe > risky vs. both: t98 = 45.0, P < 0.001). These results indicate
that even coarse information about levels of activation in key
networks can be used successfully to predict subsequent choice
behavior in a risky decision-making task, and that overall levels
of activity in systems sensitive to both risk seeking and risk
avoidance contribute separately to the ability to predict choice.
Together with the searchlight results, these findings suggest that
the neural computations underlying risk are reflected in regional
signals in parietal, insular, and medial frontal cortices, and in the
global balance of activity between regions associated with risk
seeking and those associated with risk avoidance.

To determine whether the local information identified in the
searchlight analysis contributed to mean activation in the regions
sensitive to risk seeking, risk avoidance, or both, we examined
the overlap between searchlight maps and the contrast maps
used in the coarse-coding analysis. We found that there was
a much greater degree of overlap between the searchlight maps
and regions that were more active for trials preceding safe
choices (8,520 voxels of a possible 43,995 in the univariate mask)
than between searchlight maps and regions that were more active
for trials preceding risky choices (1,706 voxels of a possible
35,215 in the univariate mask) (Fig. 4), suggesting that there is
greater local discriminative information in regions that respond
more when avoiding a risk than when pursuing one. These findings
indicate that the control networks identified in the searchlight
analyses are more active before avoiding a risk, suggesting that
cognitive control may be necessary to initiate a safe choice after
a series of risky choices and that failing to engage the necessary
cognitive control processes may lead to increased risk taking.

Discussion
The ability to avoid or pursue risk appropriately is critical to
adaptive behavior, and it underlies a number of public health
issues, such as drug use and reckless driving. In the present study,
we examined whether it was possible to use data collected before
the point of decision making to predict choice behavior in
a naturalistic risk-taking task. We found that it is possible to
predict with high accuracy whether the neural activation of an
individual previously unseen by the classifier reflects safe or risky
choice in subsequent risky decisions. Remarkably, this choice
decoding was possible at comparable levels of accuracy even
when each subject’s data were reduced down to two values: one
reflecting mean activation in risk-seeking regions and one reflecting
mean activation in risk-avoidance regions.

Fig. 2. Classification searchlight analysis of pre-cash out vs. prepump trials.
Colored voxels indicate centers of searchlights where the classifier could
successfully discriminate between prepump and pre-cash out activation
patterns (searchlight classification >60%, whole-brain cluster-corrected P <
0.05 via comparison with 1,000 random permutations). (Scale: 60–70%.)
Activation maps were projected onto an inflated average cortical surface of
the Population-Average, Landmark-, and Surface-Based (PALS) atlas using
the multifiducial mapping technique of Van Essen (29).

In addition to the local sensitivity identified in the searchlight
analysis, we examined whether choices could reflect a larger
scale balance between systems that show increased activation
before the choice of a risky vs. safe option. To assess this, we
used a cross-validated feature selection approach to determine
whether mean activation across all voxels that were active before
either risky or safe choices was sufficient to classify trials suc-
cessfully as either risky or safe. To do this, using the same design
matrix that served as the basis for the classification analysis, we
calculated a univariate contrast map for activation preceding
a risky choice vs. activation preceding a safe choice, using a per-
voxel threshold of t > 2 (risky > safe) or t < −2 (safe > risky).
Only training data were used to generate these contrast maps to
avoid any “peeking” bias. We then calculated the mean activa-
tion across the “subsequent risky choice” and “subsequent safe
choice” voxels for each subject in the training set. This yielded
two mean values for each participant, which were used to train
a classifier. Using just these two derived means from the same
two sets of voxels, it was possible to classify subsequent choices in
the test set with above-chance accuracy (67.0%; P < 0.002 via
comparison with 500 random permutations); these data are
plotted in Fig. 3. The logistic regression-based classification
boundary indicates that mean activation in both “risky choice”

Table 1. Regions where searchlight-based classification analysis discriminates between prepump and pre-cash out
trials

Region

No. of voxels

L parietal, L lateral occipital,L precentral

and postcentral gyrus

R parietal, R lateral occipital
R anterior insula, R lateral OFC
R precentral gyrus
mPFC
L anterior insula, L lateral OFC
Anterior cingulate, SMA

4,617

1,868
1,083
914
853
778
326

MNI x

−40.3

42.3
35.5
41.4
3.3
−32.7
−4

MNI y

−33.1

−45.2
20.4
−0.1
25.4
23.6
−2

MNI z

Peak classification, %

47.9

47.4
−0.5
38.2
32.7
−2.7
44

72.2

67.6
70.4
69.9
68.1
69.9
67.1

Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) coordinates denote the 3D center of gravity of each cluster. L, left; mPFC, medial prefrontal

cortex; R, right; SMA, supplementary motor area.

2472 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1321728111

Helfinstein et al.

D
N
A

L
A
C
I
G
O
L
O
H
C
Y
S
P

S
E
C
N
E
I
C
S

E
V
I
T
I
N
G
O
C

Table 2. Pearson correlations between searchlight classification
map and NeuroSynth term-based reverse inference activation
maps

Term

Control
Working
Numerical
Letter
Attention
Correct
Cue
Preparatory
Load
Hand

The 10 most highly correlated terms are listed.

Correlation (r)

0.1451
0.1159
0.1157
0.1081
0.1062
0.1060
0.0995
0.0970
0.0959
0.0924

Although our low-resolution analysis indicated that broadly
distributed patterns of activation are sufficient to predict choice,
our searchlight analyses indicated that local activation in a spe-
cific network of regions, namely, bilateral parietal and motor
regions, the anterior cingulate cortex, bilateral insula, and bi-
lateral lateral OFCs, show highly discriminable patterns of acti-
vation before risky choice and are also sufficient to predict risky
choice. Together, these findings suggest that the neural compu-
tations underlying risky choices are reflected both in highly local
signals and in coarse, broadly distributed patterns of activation,
and they highlight the utility of highly engaging decision-making
tasks that reliably correlate with real-world risk-taking behavior,
such as the BART (7), in combination with approaches that allow
us to answer targeted questions with these tasks.

The regions found to classify significantly between risky and
safe choice in our searchlight analysis are highly consistent with
regions found to be active in previous risk-taking studies, in-
cluding the cingulate cortex, insula, parietal cortices, and stria-
tum (1–6, 15–18). Of note, an analysis examining the overlap
between regions identified in the searchlight analysis and regions
used in the coarse-encoding analysis indicated that most of the
identified searchlights were more active before a safe choice than
before a risky choice. Nevertheless, the level of mean activation
in regions more active before a risky choice alone was sufficient
to predict choice significantly in the reduced-encoding analysis
and provided significant predictive power beyond the mean ac-
tivation in regions associated with risk avoidance. These results
suggest that focusing analyses exclusively on regions with high
local power causes us to overlook large networks that contain
relevant, albeit coarsely encoded, information.

In addition to our use of a multivariate approach, our study
differs from most previous risk research in its use of a paradigm
that has strong external validity when it comes to real-world,
health-relevant risk-taking behaviors. A major challenge when
conducting risk-taking research is finding an appropriate way to
operationalize risk, particularly given that economists define risk
as the amount of variance in outcomes, whereas lay persons
define risk as exposure to potential loss (7). Because the risky
option in the BART has both greater variance in outcome and
greater exposure to loss than the safe option, we managed to side
step this issue by operationalizing risk in a way that encompasses
both definitions. Most importantly, performance on the BART is
highly correlated with real-world, public health-relevant risk
taking, such as smoking, drug use, sexual risk taking, and unsafe
driving behaviors (9, 11–14), suggesting that the cognitive pro-
cesses engaged in the BART are comparable to those engaged in
real-world risk taking. Many have shied away from the use of
such complex tasks due to the possibility for confounds between
different aspects of risk taking, but using the present analytical

approach allows us to take advantage of the validity of the BART
while avoiding its potential complications.

Our searchlight analysis was designed to identify the regions,
and thus the types of information encoding or cognitive pro-
cessing, that best predict, and thus are most likely to influence,
the outcome of a subsequent risky decision. The regions found to
be active in searchlight analysis, and thus to provide the greatest
local predictive information regarding risk taking, were shown in
our reverse inference analysis to be regions typically involved in
functions such as control, working memory, and attention. These
regions were more active before safe choices in the univariate
analysis, suggesting that successfully engaging executive pro-
cesses may play a key role in initiating a safe choice. This role for
executive control in initiating safe choices may be particularly
pronounced due to the nature of the BART, where individuals
typically make a series of increasingly risky choices before having
to change their course of action to make a safe choice. However,
many health-relevant risky decisions share this same structure,
such as when deciding how many alcoholic beverages to drink
before driving home or how much one can experiment with drugs
or cigarettes before developing an addiction. Indeed, this char-
acteristic of the BART may partially explain its strong external
validity, and control structures may be critical for making the
transition from engaging in mild risks to stopping when the risk
becomes too great, both in the task and in real life.

In summary, the present study uses data from a large sample
of subjects performing a naturalistic risk-taking task to deter-
mine whether blood-oxygen–level dependent data can be used
successfully to predict choice behavior in subsequent risky deci-
sions. We find that choice behavior can be predicted with a high
level of accuracy and that the regions where activation patterns
most successfully predict choice are areas known to be involved in
executive functions, such as control, working memory, and at-
tention, including the anterior cingulate cortex, bilateral insula,
and parietal cortices. Choice can also be predicted with high
accuracy using only estimates of mean activation across two large

Fig. 3. Plot of sample values for the two parameters in the two-parameter
classification. The x-axis values indicate mean Z-statistic values for the con-
trast between prepump and pre-cash out activity in regions where prepump
activation is greater than pre-cash out activation (t > 2.0). The y-axis values
indicate the same for regions where pre-cash out activation is greater than
prepump activation. In each case, voxels were selected using independent
training set data. Blue indicates prepump samples, and red indicates pre-
cash out samples. The black line reflects the logistic regression classification
boundary; this classifier was able to separate prepump and pre-cash out
trials successfully (67% success rate).

Helfinstein et al.

PNAS | February 18, 2014 | vol. 111 | no. 7 | 2473

Procedure. A portion of the total sample took part in two separate functional
MRI (fMRI) sessions, each of which included 1 h of behavioral testing and a 1-h
scan on the same day (order counterbalanced across subjects). A total of 139
healthy adults completed at least a portion of the fMRI sessions; of those, 7
were excluded altogether [4 for missing a magnetic prepared rapid acqui-
sition gradient-echo sequence (MPRAGE) scan, 2 for withdrawing from the
study, and 1 for noncompliance with scan procedures] and 24 were excluded
from the present BART analyses (13 for excessive motion, 4 for task per-
formance that prohibited model fitting, and 7 for an unusable MPRAGE),
leaving 108 participants included in the analyses.

Experimental Design. Participants performed a variant of the BART (9) while
undergoing an fMRI scan (Fig. 1). Each round began with the presentation of
either a green (experimental) or white (control) balloon. Experimental bal-
loons constituted approximately two-thirds of the balloons presented. For
experimental balloons, subjects were instructed to choose on each trial to
either “pump” or cash out the balloon. Each successful pump would earn
them five points, to be received when the subject cashed out the balloon.
However, some pumps would cause the balloon to “explode,” and if an
explosion occurred before the subject cashed out, no points would be re-
ceived for that balloon. Thus, each pump opportunity presented the subjects
with a risky decision: They could select the safe option, a guaranteed receipt
of the amount of points already earned if they cashed out, or the risky
option, pumping, with a chance to receive an additional five points but also
with a chance of losing the points already earned. Each balloon was pro-
grammed to explode on a particular pump number, drawn randomly from
a uniform distribution between 1 and 12, although subjects were not in-
formed of the probability structure of explosions. After subjects made
a choice, a blank screen was presented for 1–2 s (average of 1.5 s), followed
by presentation of the outcome. If the balloon exploded, an image of an
exploded balloon appeared on the screen for 2 s. If not, a larger version of
the balloon appeared and subjects had another opportunity to choose to
either pump or cash out. After cash outs, subjects saw a screen with their
accumulated earnings for that round for 2 s and the task then moved on to
the next balloon. Subjects were instructed to make any button response to
control balloons until they disappeared. Balloons were separated by a blank
screen that was presented for 1–12 s (average of 4 s). Subjects had 9 min to
complete the task at their own pace, seeing an average of 18.03 experi-
mental balloons (range: 9–26).

Stimulus presentation and timing of all stimuli and response events
were achieved using MATLAB (MathWorks) and the Psychtoolbox (www.
psychtoolbox.org) (27) on an Apple PowerBook. For the experiment block
administered in the scanner, each participant viewed the task through
MRI-compatible goggles and responded with his or her right hand on an
MRI-compatible button box in the scanner.

fMRI Data Acquisition. Data were collected at two scanning facilities at UCLA,
each with a 3-T Siemens Trio MRI scanner, using a T2*-weighted echoplanar
sequence [repetition time (TR) = 2.0 s, echo time (TE) = 30 ms, 64 × 64 matrix,
field of view (FOV) = 192 mm, flip angle = 90°, slice thickness = 4.0 mm, 34
slices, oblique slice orientation, 267 volumes per run, one run]. A T2-
weighted, matched-bandwidth, high-resolution structural scan with the
same slice prescription as the functional images was also collected, and a T1-
weighted, high-resolution, volumetric scan using a MPRAGE sequence (TR =
1.9 s, TE = 2.2 6 ms, 256 × 256 matrix, FOV = 250 mm, slice thickness = 1 mm,
176 slices) was used for anatomical registration.

Imaging data were processed and analyzed using the The Oxford Centre
for Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain (FMRIB)’s Software
Library (FSL). FMRIB’s Model Correction Linear Image Registration Tool (MCFLIRT)
was used for motion correction. Following motion correction, Multivariate
Exploratory Linear Optimized Decomposition into Independent Components
(MELODIC) was used to identify artifactual components in the data, which
were modeled as nuisance regressors. Brain Extraction Tool (BET) was used
to extract the brain from the skull. The data were filtered using a nonlinear
high-pass filter with a 100-s cutoff. Data were smoothed using a 5-mm FWHM
isotropic Gaussian filter.

fMRI Data Analysis. To conduct the classification analysis, patterns of acti-
vation on two types of trials were compared: those that immediately pre-
ceded a cash out trial and those that immediately preceded a pump trial (Fig.
1). For each subject, all pump trials that immediately preceded a cash out
trial were identified. Each of these trials was then matched with a pump trial
that immediately preceded a pump trial and had the same pump opportunity
as the cash out trial (i.e., the number of times the subject had already pumped
the balloon when this trial occurred was the same for the prepump and pre-

Fig. 4.
Searchlights that could successfully discriminate between prepump
and pre-cash out trials overlaid on a map of prepump vs. pre–cash-out ac-
tivation thresholded at t > 2.0. More searchlights were located in regions
where activation is higher on pre-cash out trials (8,520 voxels of 43,995 total
voxels in the univariate mask) than on prepump trials (1,706 voxels of 35,215
total voxels in the univariate mask), suggesting that it is changes in regions
related to risk aversion that most reliably predict whether a subject will
make a risky or safe choice.

networks, indicating that information encoding risky decision-
making behavior is represented at a very low spatial resolution,
as well as in highly localized regions.

Overall, our findings suggest that clearly dissociable brain
states precede selection of risky vs. safe choices in a risky decision-
making situation, even when objective levels of risk and imminent
motoric responses are identical. These patterns of activation differ
in dissociable ways both in the overall balance of activation be-
tween systems active before risk seeking and in those active before
risk avoidance, as well as in highly localized changes in activation,
mostly in regions sensitive to risk avoidance.

Methods
Participants. All participants were recruited from the Los Angeles area as part
of the Consortium for Neuropsychiatric Phenomics at the University of Cal-
ifornia, Los Angeles (UCLA) (www.phenomics.ucla.edu), with the goal of
examining differences in response inhibition and working memory between
healthy adults and patients diagnosed with bipolar disorder, schizophrenia,
or adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Only data collected
from healthy participants were included in the present analyses. All candi-
dates had telephone screening, followed by additional in-person screening
and informed consent. For both the healthy and patient groups, participants
were men or women between the ages of 21 and 50 y who met the fol-
lowing selection criteria: a National Institutes of Health racial/ethnic cate-
gory of either white/not Hispanic or Latino or Hispanic or Latino; a primary
language of either English or Spanish; completion of at least 8 y of formal
education; no significant medical illness; adequate cooperation to complete
assessments; and visual acuity of 20/60 or better. Additional exclusion cri-
teria for participants that took part in the imaging portion of the study
included left-handedness, pregnancy, history of head injury with loss of
consciousness or cognitive sequelae, or other contraindications to scanning
(e.g., claustrophobia, metal in body, body too large to fit in scanner).

Participants in the healthy group were excluded if they had lifetime di-
agnoses of schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder; bipolar I or II dis-
order; or a current diagnosis of major depressive disorder, suicidality, anxiety
disorder (obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder, or posttraumatic stress disorder), ADHD, or substance abuse/
dependence.

All participants gave written informed consent according to the proce-
dures approved by the Institutional Review Boards at UCLA and the Los
Angeles County Department of Mental Health.

2474 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1321728111

Helfinstein et al.

D
N
A

L
A
C
I
G
O
L
O
H
C
Y
S
P

S
E
C
N
E
I
C
S

E
V
I
T
I
N
G
O
C

cash out trials). The prepump trials were randomly chosen from the pools of
appropriate trials using Python’s random.sample function. All prepump and
pre-cash out trials that could not be matched in this way were not included in
the prepump and pre-cash out regressors. Thus, the distribution of risk (i.e.,
amount of points that could be lost and likelihood of explosion) for the pre-
pump and pre-cash out regressors was identical. The selected prepump and
pre-cash out trials were then included as regressors in the linear regression
model. To control for differences in reaction time between prepump trials and
pre-cash out trials, we used a variable epoch regressor, where the duration of
each regressor was the length of the subject’s reaction time on that trial (24).
In addition to these regressors, all pump and cash out trials were modeled with
two regressors: one with a fixed amplitude and a fixed duration equivalent to
the average reaction time (RT) for all pump opportunities and one with a fixed
amplitude and duration equivalent to the actual RT on that pump oppor-
tunity. All control balloon pump trials were modeled with two analogous
regressors. Six motion parameters and their temporal derivatives were also
included as regressors of no interest. Beta-weights from each subject for the
prepump and pre-cash out regressors were then used as inputs for the
machine-learning algorithm. Whole-brain and searchlight (25) classifications
were conducted using a linear support vector machine classifier in PyMVPA
(28). Classification was cross-subject, with subjects divided into six folds, with
classification of the subjects in each fold predicted based on classification of
subjects in the other five folds. For whole-brain analysis, this process was
repeated 50 times with subjects randomly assigned to a fold each time.
Searchlight results were thresholded at a classification rate of 60%, and a
random permutation procedure was then used to determine the appropriate
cluster size for correction at P = 0.05. Searchlight maps were then correlated
with term-based maps in NeuroSynth (26) to determine the cognitive processes
most strongly associated with searchlight regions.

After searchlight analyses, we conducted a follow-up analysis examining
classification using coarse measures of activation in regions where activation

differed substantially between pre-cash out and prepump conditions. To
do this, we used only training samples (five-sixths of the total data) to
again determine voxels where the difference in activation between cash
out and pump trials was t > 2.0 (prepump > pre-cash out) or t < −2.0 (pre-
cash out > prepump). For each training sample, we then calculated the
mean activation across the t > 2.0 voxels and the mean activation across
the t < −2.0 voxels, reducing the information in each training sample to
two values. We fed these two values into a logistic classifier, which we
then used to classify test samples based on the mean activation from the
same two sets of voxels. We repeated this process 50 times with subjects
randomly assigned to folds on each iteration and then determined statistical
significance via random permutation.

We then examined whether searchlights that enabled significant classi-
fication were located primarily in regions that showed greater activation
before cash out or in regions that showed greater activation before pumps.
To do this, we used the same prepump and pre-cash out regressors used in
the classification analysis and calculated univariate contrast maps, with
per-voxel thresholds of t > 2.0 (prepump > pre-cash out) and t < −2.0 (pre-
cash out > prepump), this time using data from all subjects. We then cal-
culated the number of voxels significant in the searchlight analyses that
overlapped with each map.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Eric Miller and Angelica Bato for assistance
in data collection and Yaroslav Halchenko and Gael Varoquax for advice
regarding data analysis. This work was supported by the Consortium for
Neuropsychiatric Phenomics [National
Institutes for Health Roadmap for
Medical Research Grants UL1-DE019580 (to R.M.B., Principal Investigator),
RL1MH083268 (to Nelson Freimer, Principal Investigator), RL1MH083269 (to
T.D.C., Principal Investigator), RL1DA024853 (to E.D.L., Principal Investigator),
and PL1MH083271 (to R.M.B., Principal Investigator)] and by the Tennenbaum
Center for the Biology of Creativity.

1. Mohr PNC, Biele G, Heekeren HR (2010) Neural processing of risk. J Neurosci 30(19):

6613–6619.

2. Krain AL, Wilson AM, Arbuckle R, Castellanos FX, Milham MP (2006) Distinct neural
mechanisms of risk and ambiguity: A meta-analysis of decision-making. Neuroimage
32(1):477–484.

3. Preuschoff K, Bossaerts P, Quartz SR (2006) Neural differentiation of expected reward

and risk in human subcortical structures. Neuron 51(3):381–390.

4. Rudorf S, Preuschoff K, Weber B (2012) Neural correlates of anticipation risk reflect

risk preferences. J Neurosci 32(47):16683–16692.

5. Rao H, Korczykowski M, Pluta J, Hoang A, Detre JA (2008) Neural correlates of vol-
untary and involuntary risk taking in the human brain: An fMRI Study of the Balloon
Analog Risk Task (BART). Neuroimage 42(2):902–910.

6. Schonberg T, et al. (2012) Decreasing ventromedial prefrontal cortex activity during
sequential risk-taking: An FMRI investigation of the Balloon Analog Risk Task. Front
Neurosci 6:80.

7. Schonberg T, Fox CR, Poldrack RA (2011) Mind the gap: Bridging economic and nat-

uralistic risk-taking with cognitive neuroscience. Trends Cogn Sci 15(1):11–19.

14. Lejuez CW, Simmons BL, Aklin WM, Daughters SB, Dvir S (2004) Risk-taking propensity
and risky sexual behavior of individuals in residential substance use treatment. Addict
Behav 29(8):1643–1647.

15. Engelmann JB, Tamir D (2009) Individual differences in risk preference predict neural

responses during financial decision-making. Brain Res 1290:28–51.

16. Preuschoff K, Quartz SR, Bossaerts P (2008) Human insula activation reflects risk

prediction errors as well as risk. J Neurosci 28(11):2745–2752.

17. Weber BJ, Huettel SA (2008) The neural substrates of probabilistic and intertemporal

decision making. Brain Res 1234:104–115.

18. Symmonds M, Wright ND, Bach DR, Dolan RJ (2011) Deconstructing risk: Separable

encoding of variance and skewness in the brain. Neuroimage 58(4):1139–1149.

19. Paulus MP, Rogalsky C, Simmons A, Feinstein JS, Stein MB (2003) Increased activation
in the right insula during risk-taking decision making is related to harm avoidance
and neuroticism. Neuroimage 19(4):1439–1448.

20. Matthews SC, Simmons AN, Lane SD, Paulus MP (2004) Selective activation of the
nucleus accumbens during risk-taking decision making. Neuroreport 15(13):
2123–2127.

21. Kuhnen CM, Knutson B (2005) The neural basis of financial risk taking. Neuron 47(5):

8. Fox CR, Tannenbaum D (2011) The elusive search for stable risk preferences. Front

763–770.

Psychol 2:298.

9. Lejuez CW, et al. (2002) Evaluation of a behavioral measure of risk taking: The Bal-

loon Analogue Risk Task (BART). J Exp Psychol Appl 8(2):75–84.

10. Weber EU, Johnson EJ (2008) Decisions under uncertainty: Psychological, economic,
and neuroeconomic explanations for risk preference. Neuroeconomics: Decision
Making and the Brain, eds Glimcher PW, Camerer CF, Fehr E, Poldrack RA (Elsevier,
London), pp 127–144.

11. Aklin WM, Lejuez CW, Zvolensky MJ, Kahler CW, Gwadz M (2005) Evaluation of be-
havioral measures of risk taking propensity with inner city adolescents. Behav Res
Ther 43(2):215–228.

12. Hopko DR, et al. (2006) Construct validity of the Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART):
Relationship with MDMA use by inner-city drug users in residential treatment.
J Psychopathol Behav Assess 28(2):95–101.

13. Lejuez CW, Aklin WM, Zvolensky MJ, Pedulla CM (2003) Evaluation of the Balloon
Analogue Risk Task (BART) as a predictor of adolescent real-world risk-taking be-
haviours. J Adolesc 26(4):475–479.

22. Lee TMC, Leung AWS, Fox PT, Gao J-H, Chan CCH (2008) Age-related differences in
neural activities during risk taking as revealed by functional MRI. Soc Cogn Affect
Neurosci 3(1):7–15.

23. Xue G, et al. (2009) Functional dissociations of risk and reward processing in the

medial prefrontal cortex. Cereb Cortex 19(5):1019–1027.

24. Grinband J, Wager TD, Lindquist M, Ferrera VP, Hirsch J (2008) Detection of time-

varying signals in event-related fMRI designs. Neuroimage 43(3):509–520.

25. Kriegeskorte N, Goebel R, Bandettini P (2006) Information-based functional brain

mapping. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103(10):3863–3868.

26. Yarkoni T, Poldrack RA, Nichols TE, Van Essen DC, Wager TD (2011) Large-scale au-
tomated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nat Methods 8(8):
665–670.

27. Brainard DH (1997) The psychophysics toolbox. Spat Vis 10(4):433–436.
28. Hanke M, et al. (2009) PyMVPA: A python toolbox for multivariate pattern analysis of

fMRI data. Neuroinformatics 7(1):37–53.

29. Van Essen DC (2005) A Population-Average, Landmark- and Surface-based (PALS)

atlas of human cerebral cortex. Neuroimage 28(3):635–662.

Helfinstein et al.

PNAS | February 18, 2014 | vol. 111 | no. 7 | 2475

