NeuroImage 69 (2013) 120–125

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

NeuroImage

j o u r n a l h o m e p a ge : w ww . e l s e v i e r . c o m/ l o c a t e / y n i m g

Escaping the here and now: Evidence for a role of the default mode network in
perceptually decoupled thought
Jonathan Smallwood a,⁎, Christine Tipper b, Kevin Brown c, Benjamin Baird b, Haakon Engen a,
Joseph R. Michaels b, Scott Grafton b, Jonathan W. Schooler b
a Department of Social Neuroscience, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany
b Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
c Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Accepted 8 December 2012
Available online 20 December 2012

Keywords:
Absent-minded lapses
Daydreaming
Default mode network
Medial prefrontal cortex
Posterior cingulate
Mind-wandering
Response time
Stimulus-independent thought

Introduction

Cognition that is not based on perception can lead to at least two different outcomes. In some situations, cog-
nition that is independent of perception can allow actions to be selected other than those prescribed by im-
mediate perceptual input. In others, cognition can be independent of perception and unrelated to the current
behavioral goal allowing thoughts to develop that are largely independent of the actions involved in an ex-
ternal task. The default mode network (DMN) has been implicated in both of these kinds of perceptually
decoupled thought. The current experiment used functional magnetic resonance imaging to explore whether
a common region of this network was co-activated by both of these states. Both the medial pre-frontal cortex
and the posterior cingulate – two major hubs of the DMN – showed greater activity when (i) actions that did
not depend upon immediate perceptual input were faster and (ii) when actions based on perceptual input
were slower. Together these data suggest that the DMN is important in cognition that is independent from
perceptual input regardless of whether such thoughts result in action, or, instead compete with the behavior-
al goals of the moment.

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

One distinguishing feature of higher order cognition is that it
allows the agent freedom from immediacy (Shadlen and Gold, 2004)
whereby information processing is not limited to that which emerges
as a direct response to stimulus input. At least in humans, this can
arise in two different ways. Sometimes cognition supports actions
that are not an automatic response to events in the immediate stim-
ulus environment. For example, when stopping to pick up laundry
while driving home, our behavior is not prescribed by the external
stimulus: Unlike a red trafﬁc light, stopping is not an act we should
take every time we see the laundromat. At other times cognition
can proceed largely unencumbered by both external stimuli and im-
mediate behavioral goals. When we daydream about a vacation on
the commute to work self-generated information forms the content
of thought. Thus a second form of freedom from immediacy arises
from states of ‘pure’ internal mentation which have no direct basis
in the external environment (referred to as stimulus independent
thought) (Antrobus et al., 1967). The current experiment explored if
similar neural processes underpin these two different types of

⁎ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: smallwood@cbs.mpg.de (J. Smallwood).

1053-8119/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.12.012

freedom from immediacy: (a) situations in which actions are selected
that could not be made on the basis of immediate stimulus input
and (b) situations when cognition is decoupled from perception and
unrelated to current behavioral goals.

The default mode network (DMN, (Buckner et al., 2008) is a
constellation of brain regions with two main hubs (Andrews-Hanna
et al., 2010) — the anterior medial pre-frontal cortex (aMPFC, BA
10) and the posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus (pCC/Pre, BAs 7,
23, 31). The DMN is recruited when decisions regarding external
stimuli are made using content from memory, for example, making
inferences about mental states of others (Mitchell et al., 2006), imag-
ining the future (Schacter et al., 2007, 2008, 2012), making autobio-
graphical plans (Gerlach et al., 2011; Spreng et al., 2010), or, in the
simplest case, retrieving a memory based on an associated cue
(Huijbers et al., 2011). In these studies there is a relatively tight
connection between DMN activity and behavior because the cognitive
processes lead to relatively immediate task relevant actions (e.g. an
external response in a cognitive experiment).

The DMN is also active during SITs that have no relation to any
external task being performed (Andrews-Hanna, 2011) such as
daydreaming, mind-wandering, or absent-minded errors (Christoff
et al., 2009; Mason et al., 2007; McKiernan et al., 2003, 2006;
Stawarczyk et al., 2011; Weissman et al., 2006). Although states of
self-generated thought such as mind-wandering may lead to behav-
ioral outcomes over longer time frames, or lead to errors in a task,

J. Smallwood et al. / NeuroImage 69 (2013) 120–125

121

they rarely make a direct contribution to immediate and accurate
external task relevant actions.

Operationalizing cognition that is independent of perception

The DMN therefore has been implicated in two forms of cognition
that allow freedom from immediacy: it allows cognition to guide
actions that go beyond those prescribed by an external stimulus and
it is implicated in thoughts that have no bearing upon immediate
perceptual input or current task goals. The current experiment used
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine whether
speciﬁc regions of the DMN are engaged during thoughts that do
not depend upon perceptual input regardless of whether they result
in task-related action. To test whether speciﬁc regions of the DMN
network supports a general process through which cognition gains
independence from perception (known as perceptual decoupling)
we asked participants to perform two tasks. In one, working memory
(WM), a sequence of numeric stimuli was encoded and participants
were intermittently probed regarding the parity of the prior stimulus.
In a second, choice reaction time (CRT), sequences of digits were
monitored at a relatively minimal level for the intermittent occurrence
of non-colored target and participants made responses that indicated
the parity of the colored target.

In this paradigm actions are always initiated in response to
colored stimuli. An important feature of this design was that the
colored stimuli required participants to switch from a passive
viewing mode to one entailing active external behavior. Although
both induced this switch, in the WM task participants had to gener-
ate the action based on information stored internally (i.e. Was the
previous number odd or even?), while in the CRT task the same
decision is made based on perceptual information that is available
at the moment that the action takes place (i.e. Is the current number
odd or even?). Thus, actions made in the WM task depend on cogni-
tion unrelated to immediate perceptual input to a greater extent
than do those in the CRT task. In relative terms, therefore, correct
responses to the colored numbers in the WM task reﬂect perceptu-
ally decoupled thought that results in a task-relevant action.

Thoughts that are not prescribed by perceptual input and that are
unrelated to external tasks goals cannot be operationalized as directly
as those that lead to action; instead this state must be inferred
indirectly. One method to do this exploits the fact that perceptually
independent thought that is unrelated to the current task can
compromise performance in tasks that depend upon detailed external
attention (e.g. Weissman et al., 2006). In the current experiment we
operationalized poor performance as longer response times (RT)
and performed a trial-by-trial analysis of the neural responses that
preceded longer RT. A perceptual
focus is needed both when
encoding WM non-targets and when responding to CRT targets and

Table 1
A summary of how the different conditions allow an examination of the common role
of memory and perception in the guidance of behavior.

Task

Choice reaction time (CRT)

Working memory (WM)

Stimulus type

Non colored

Colored

6
No
High
No

Example stimulus
Motor response
Event frequency
Task relevance
Guidance of cognition Memory
Example stimulus
Motor response
Event Frequency
Task Relevance
Guidance of Cognition

3
No
High
Yes
Perception

7
Yes
Low
Yes
Perception
?
Yes
Low
Yes
Memory

so based on the logic of Weismann et al. on the occasions when
actions based on perceptual input are inefﬁcient (e.g. RT is relatively
long), we inferred that task-unrelated perceptually decoupling was
likely to have occurred.

Summary of experimental aims

To test whether perceptually decoupled thought depends on
similar processes regardless of whether it results in immediate
action, we sought evidence of brain regions whose activity patterns
were common to two situations: (a) relatively fast responses for
actions that depend upon memory rather than perceptual input
and (b) relatively slower responses for actions that depend on
perceptual input rather than memory. Importantly, regions with
activity patterns which showed a crossover interaction of this type
would support a process that was independent of immediate percep-
tion and that was not a direct consequence of a task, the need to
make an active response, or the frequency that an event occurred
(see Table 1).

Methods

Participants

16 neurologically healthy right-handed individuals participated in

the current experiment (8 females, age range=18 to 21).

Tasks

Participants performed two runs of both the CRT and the WM task
using a counterbalanced design. Runs of both tasks consisted of a se-
ries of 32 mini-blocks. Each mini-block began with a series of
non-colored numbers and ended with the presentation of a colored
stimulus. In each run, 128 non-colored stimuli were presented and
the number in each mini block was randomized. Each run lasted
560 s and on average 17.5 s of non-colored numbers preceded each
colored event. In the CRT task the mini-blocks ended with the presen-
tation of a red numeral. In the WM task mini-blocks were terminated
by the presentation of a target trial (a red ‘?’). In both tasks, partici-
pants made a right-hand manual response to the colored targets
using a button box. A left button indicated a target stimulus was
odd while a right button push indicated that it was even. Each stimu-
lus was presented for 1–1.5 s and was followed by a ﬁxation cross
lasting 1–2.5 s. Prior to performing each task in the scanner, partici-
pants were given practice runs of each that lasted approximately
one minute. Task order was counterbalanced. Stimulus presentation
used MATLAB (Version 7.5, The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA) and
the Psychophysics Toolbox extensions (Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997;
Kleiner et al., 2007).

fMRI data acquisition

fMRI data were collected on a phased array research dedicated
Siemens Magnetom Trio Tim 3.0 T scanner with a standard 12 chan-
nel head coil. The entire scanning session consisted of six scans, in-
cluding four task-related functional scans, a resting state functional
scan, and a high-resolution 3D anatomical scan. Functional scans
used a 2D gradient echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) pulse sequence
sensitive to T2* BOLD contrast (64×64 matrix, 192×192 mm FOV,
37 interleaved AC-PC oriented transverse slices, 3 mm×3 mm
in-plane resolution, 3 mm slice thickness, 0.5 mm slice gap,
2000 ms TR, 30 ms TE, 90° ﬂip angle). Task-related scans acquired
280 functional volumes. The high-resolution structural image was ac-
quired using a ﬂash 3D pulse sequence sensitive to T1 contrast
(256×256 matrix, 220×220 mm FOV, 192 interleaved saggital slices,
0.9×0.9 mm in-plane resolution, 0.89 mm slice thickness, 0.01 mm

122

J. Smallwood et al. / NeuroImage 69 (2013) 120–125

slice gap, 15 ms TR, 4.20 ms TE, 20° ﬂip angle). Each functional scan-
ning run began with the acquisition of four dummy volumes used to
achieve steady-state tissue magnetization, which were discarded. A
transistor–transistor logic (TTL) pulse sent out by the scanner at the
onset of each viable EPI volume triggered the stimulus presentation
software, and synched the beginning of each trial to the onset of the
next complete image volume. All images were reconstructed off-line
according to standard Siemens protocols and stored in DICOM format.

fMRI image processing

All preprocessing and analysis were performed using SPM8
(Wellcome Trust Department of
Imaging Neuroscience, University
College London, UK). Functional scans were realigned to their mean
volume using a seventh degree B-Spline interpolation. Each participant's
structural scan was co-registered to the mean of his/her functional vol-
umes using an automated rigid-body transformation algorithm. Normal-
ization to MNI space was performed using Uniﬁed Segmentation
(Ashburner and Friston, 2005) and the subsequent images were
resampled into 3×3×3.5 mm voxels. Finally, images were smoothed
with a 5-mm FWHM kernel. This relatively low smoothing kernel was
chosen to ensure maximum anatomical speciﬁcity of the subsequent
results.

Statistical analysis was performed using the general linear model
framework implemented in SPM8. A high-pass ﬁlter (128 s), and an
autoregressive model [AR(1)] was applied to correct for low frequency
drift and correct for autocorrelation. Additionally, movement parame-
ters, as estimated during realignment, were added as regressors of no
interest to remove residual motion-related variance.

Results

Behavioral performance

Participants were accurate on both the WM (M=.96 (SE=.01)
and the CRT task (M=.96 (SE=.01) and this did not vary by condi-
tion, F (1,16)=.03, p=.86. Consistent with previous behavioral
studies (e.g. Baird et al., 2012; Smallwood et al., in press) correct RT

-6 

18 

-10 

Left

37 

51 

min 

max 

Fig. 1. Neural recruitment reﬂecting perceptually decoupled thought regardless of task
relevance. The brain regions for which the correlation between longer RT and the bold sig-
nal was different when the perceptual input was important to actions (targets in the
choice reaction time task, CRT, and the pre-target interval during working memory,
WM) than when perceptual input was less important to actions (pre-target interval dur-
ing CRT and targets during WM). Images were thresholded at pb.005. Minimum cluster
size (k=71) was determined using topological FDR.

Table 2
Regions of activation observed in the current experiment.

t

Cluster size

Peak co ordinates

Posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus
MPFC
Dorsal MPFC
Ventral MPFC

4.69
4.45
4.02
3.93

255
112
76
71

y

X
−9 −58
12
−6
−6

50
32
38

z

34
16
48
−15

was signiﬁcantly shorter when participants performed the WM
(M=685 ms (SE=5.2)) than the CRT (M=730 ms (SE=5.2)), F
(1,16)=6.0, p b.05. RT is shorter during WM blocks because partici-
pants must continually maintain attention on each digit, whereas in
the CRT task participants need only attend when the colored target
is presented. Presentation of the colored stimulus in CRT therefore
requires its identity to be encoded before the decision can be made;
hence RT is longer than in the WM task.

fMRI

Our analysis consisted of a whole brain search of the patterns of
brain activity that relate to faster actions that are controlled by mem-
ory and slower responding when actions depend on immediate per-
ceptual
input. Following Weissman et al. (2006) we created
subject-speciﬁc GLM to estimate beta weights for four conditions, in-
cluding the target stimuli and a pre-target interval for both WM and
CRT tasks. In order to explore baseline activity during the pre-target
interval we placed a regressor 2.5 s before the non-colored stimulus
that directly preceded a colored stimulus (e.g. prior to the informa-
tion that should be encoded during the WM task). Modeling the
pre-target period in this fashion allowed us to assess the impact of
trial-by-trial changes in baseline activity that preceded all informa-
tion that could contribute to a response in both tasks using an equal
time window. We also modeled the onset of the colored stimulus to
index target related activity. For both of these regressors RT was a
parametric modulator at the ﬁrst level. The parametric modulation
of the regressors placed in the pre-target interval allowed us to use
trial-by-trial changes in the subsequent speed of responding as a
proximal measure of the information processes that were taking
place in the pre-target period. The parametric modulation of the
neural activity that occurs upon presentation of the target provides
a proximal indicator for the neural processes that facilitate or impair
current action. The canonical HRF was used to model the BOLD data.
Finally, average beta weights across the two runs of each task were
calculated, indicating the strength of the correlation between BOLD
activity and RT for each task and each event type. Higher beta values
indicated brain regions in which increased BOLD activity is associated
with slower responses to targets, and thus compromised (less
efﬁcient) performance.

Average beta weight estimates of each participant's RT-correlated
BOLD activity for each event type (target/pre-target baseline) in each
task (WM/CRT) were submitted to a second level random-effects
analysis using a 2×2 repeated measures ANOVA. Using the
subject-speciﬁc average beta images from the ﬁrst-level analysis, we
calculated a contrast that weighted events positively when cognition
depended upon perception (CRT colored and WM baseline) and nega-
tively on situations when it did not (CRT baseline and WM colored).
Whole brain analyses were conducted, and thresholded at p b.005,
correcting for multiple comparisons using topological FDR (Chumbley
et al., 2010). This analysis revealed four clusters of activity: one with-
in the PCC and three within the mPFC. These clusters are displayed in
Fig. 1 and reﬂect neural regions whose activation showed an interac-
tion between relatively longer RT under conditions when cognition
should be guided by perception and shorter RT when cognition was
guided by information based on memory (see also Table 2).

J. Smallwood et al. / NeuroImage 69 (2013) 120–125

123

i

ii

P

T

P

T

iii

P

T

-6

Left

iv

Task

CRT
WM

p<.005 
min

Interval

Target
Pre-target

T
P   
k = 71

max

P

T

Fig. 2. Speciﬁc relation between RT and neural activity under conditions in which action depended on perceptual input or when it did not. Panels i–iv present the average beta
weights at the group level in the peak voxels of each of the four clusters of activity demonstrating an interaction between RT when perception was more important to action
and when it was less important to action. In both the posterior cingulate cortex (Cluster i) and medial pre-frontal cortex (Cluster iii) a full cross-over interaction was observed in-
dicating that activity in these regions was associated with faster actions if task performance depended on memory and slower actions if task performance depended on perception.
Regions: i) posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), ii) dorsal medial pre-frontal cortex (dMPFC), iii) medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and iv) ventral pre-frontal cortex (VMPFC).

To ascertain the speciﬁc nature of the relationship between neural
activity and performance we extracted the average beta weights from
the peak voxel in each of the four clusters. These were calculated sep-
arately for each task event (pre-target/target) in each task (CRT/WM)
and are presented in Fig. 2. In the clusters centered around the PCC
and the MPFC, indicated by the blue shading, neural activity and RT
exhibited a complete cross-over interaction: in these regions higher
BOLD signal activity was associated with faster actions when behavior
did not depend on perception (e.g. the pre-target intervals in the CRT
and the targets intervals in the WM task) and slowed responding
when behavior depended directly on perceptual
input (e.g. the
pre-target intervals in the WM task and the targets in the CRT). In
the clusters centered around the dorsal mPFC and in the ventral
mPFC, indicated by green shading, the interaction was due to in-
creased neural activity associated with longer RT whenever task

relevant behavior depended on perception (e.g. the CRT). Only in
the clusters in the PCC and the mPFC, therefore, was neural activity
associated with a cost to actions based on perception as well as a ben-
eﬁt to actions based on memory.1

Finally, we used the default settings of SPM 8 to formally test the
spatial conjunction null hypothesis (Nichols et al., 2005) between
those brain regions that were associated with slower responding
when action was based on immediate perceptual input and faster
responding when action was based on information from memory.

1 We also examined the reverse contrast (e.g. those brain regions which facilitated
responding to external information and interfered with responding to internal infor-
mation). This analysis yielded no clusters with sufﬁcient extent to pass the cluster cor-
rection (FDR) when we applied the same threshold as in prior analyses (p b.005) nor
an uncorrected threshold of p b.001.

124

J. Smallwood et al. / NeuroImage 69 (2013) 120–125

-6 

Left

18 

-10 

37 

51 

Fig. 3. The results of a conjunction analysis comparing the task differences in the cor-
relation between RT and bold activity during targets (CRT>WM) and the pre-target in-
terval (CRT bWM). Default SPM settings were used and the analysis was thresholded at
p b.05. The minimum cluster size was set at 10.

The contrasts targets (CRT>WM) and non-targets (CRT bWM) were
entered as the input images and the p-value for this conjunction
was set at p b.05. The resulting images are presented in Fig. 3. For
the purposes of display the minimum cluster size was set at 10. It
can be seen that three of the four clusters identiﬁed by the main
analysis exhibited activity in similar spatial regions. Importantly,
therefore, the clusters of activity centered on the PCC and the mPFC
– the two regions that exhibited a full crossover interaction in the
main analysis – survived this more conservative conjunction analysis.

Discussion

The current work set out to identify whether elements of the DMN
exhibit activity that support perceptually decoupled thought regard-
less of whether or not it resulted in immediate action. We observed
clusters of activity in both the PCC and in a dorsal region of mPFC
whose activity was associated with a faster responding to task rele-
vant processing when behavior was governed by memory (e.g.
responding during the WM task) and slower responding when be-
havior was
(e.g.
responding during CRT). Together these data suggest that cognitive
operations that are engaged when the mind decouples attention
from perceptual input occur in PCC and mPFC regardless of whether
the ultimate cognitive goal is to perform an action in the here and
now.

controlled by immediate perceptual

input

Although perceptually decoupled thought is necessary for certain
forms of mental simulation, it can also derail the goals of the moment
(see Smallwood, forthcoming-a, forthcoming-b for a discussion) and
so the hypothesis that this information processing state is important
for multiple psychological processes served by the DMN provides a
simple parsimonious account for the variety of mental states that
have been linked to this network. For example, prior studies have
documented that elements of the default mode such as mPFC and
pCC have been linked to absent-minded lapses (e.g. Christoff et al.,
2009; Weissman et al., 2006). Others have documented higher DMN
activity under situations in which internal guided thought is neces-
sary such as during mental simulation or episodic retrieval
(Huijbers et al., 2011; Mitchell, 2009; Mason et al., 2007). As both

absent-minded lapses and mental simulation can depend on percep-
tual decoupling, the hypothesis that elements of the DMN affords per-
ceptually decoupled thought not only accounts for the current data it
also provides a uniﬁed account of the variety of psychological pro-
cesses that are associated with this network.

We observed that regions in both the mPFC and pCC exhibit
behavior that are consistent with the claim that they afford perceptu-
ally decoupled thought and this hypothesis gains further support
from prior accounts of the speciﬁc function postulated for each re-
gion. For example, several authors have suggested that mPFC allows
cognition to focus on internal representations rather than those
provided by perception, perhaps by allowing the integration of multi-
ple features in the services of a cognitive task (Christoff et al., 2004;
Wagner et al., 2005). It has also been argued that the mPFC serves a
general function that supports a retrieval mode that is independent
of content (e.g. Tulving, 1987). Because the contents of the retrieval
processes engaged during spontaneous self-generated thoughts are
not likely to entail the parity of numbers, while task related retrieval
in the WM tasks must, the overlap between these two conditions in
mPFC is consistent with the view that this region supports a general
purpose retrieval mode. Finally, there are several lines of anatomical
evidence that supports a link between internally focused thought
and the mPFC. In macaques the uncinate fasciculus ﬁber tract con-
nects the mPFC to areas of the medial temporal lobe (Petrides and
Pandaya, 2007) and resting state studies in humans has revealed
functional connectivity between the bilateral hippocampus and ven-
tral regions of mPFC (Kahn et al., 2008). Indeed, consistent with a
role of the uncinate fasciculus in memory-guided thought, patient
M.L., who suffered a focal lesion to this ﬁber tract was unable to en-
gage in normal mental time travel (Levine et al., 1998). Together
this functional and anatomical evidence suggests that MPFC receives
input from brain systems that are known to represent information
stored internally rather than sensory information and is one reason
why this region may allow behavioral control that is independent of
stimulus input and hence more abstract (Ramnani and Owen, 2004).
Our data also suggests that the pCC is important in processes
necessary for perceptually decoupled cognition. Consistent with
evidence for a role of the pCC in perceptual decoupling, studies
using tasks that depend on control but with less requirement on
memory retrieval (e.g. the Eriksen ﬂanker task) have demonstrated
that the pCC region increases activity when external task perfor-
mance suffers (Eichele et al., 2008). Critically, however, pCC is also
known to support task relevant memory retrieval, and is thought to
be especially important in resolving the competition between memo-
ry retrieval and concurrent perceptual
input. In a recent study,
Huijbers and colleagues developed a paradigm in which the retrieval
of information from memory occurs in the context of task irrelevant
visual input. This study demonstrated that pCC activity is high when
retrieval is successful and task irrelevant visual input is disregarded.
By contrast, when pCC activity is low retrieval fails and the task irrel-
evant visual input is more likely to be encoded (Huijbers et al., 2009).
This evidence suggests that pCC activity may be important in the
resolution of competition between concurrent external input and
memory retrieval processes and so could be important in stabilizing
an internal train thought against the disruptions of the external
environment (see Smallwood, forthcoming-b).

Based on these different lines of evidence we propose that these
two regions of the DMN (pCC and mPFC) may serve complimentary
functions in facilitating an internal train of thought; the mPFC may
allow internal representations to inﬂuence cognition, whereas the
pCC could help resolve the competition between external and inter-
nal information. Together the functions of perceptual decoupling as
well as the self-generation of thought based on memory map directly
onto theoretical formulations of those conditions that are conducive
to the persistence of an internal train of thought that is unrelated to
sensory input (Smallwood, forthcoming-a, forthcoming-b). If this

J. Smallwood et al. / NeuroImage 69 (2013) 120–125

125

formulation is correct, understanding the interplay between pCC and
mPFC may be important in attempts to understand cognition because
the process of perceptual decoupling and coupling maybe involved in
our capacity for freedom from immediacy that differentiates volun-
tary action from reﬂexive behavior (Haggard, 2008).

Finally, at the most general level these data add to a growing body
of evidence (Spreng, 2012) that question the conception of the DMN
as a task-negative network (Fox et al., 2005). Previous studies have
argued against the idea that the DMN is necessarily anti-correlated
with goal directed systems (such as the dorso-lateral PFC, or the
dorsal anterior Cinglate Cortex) because both are active under certain
conditions such as during mind-wandering (Christoff et al., 2009;
Kirschner et al., 2012), autobiographical planning (Gerlach et al.,
2011; Spreng et al., 2010; Spreng and Schacter, 2012) or when social
information is maintained in working memory (Meyer et al., 2012). In
a manner that is complimentary to the argumentation proposed by
others (e.g. Spreng, 2012), the current study documents that the
DMN provides support for perceptually decoupled thought if it occurs
in the service of the task requiring memory input, while hindering
task performance if activity in the same region occurs a few moments
earlier in situations when perceptually coupled thought is important.
Although the coarse spatial resolution of fMRI means that we cannot
preclude the possibility that speciﬁc populations of neurons serve dis-
tinct functions within different elements of the DMN, these data do indi-
cate that at the network level the identiﬁcation of whether a brain
system serves to facilitate or interfere with a task cannot be made on
brain anatomy alone. Instead, we propose that it is the temporal
coupling of activity in brain regions to goals in the external environment
that determines whether it helps or hinders concurrent actions
(Smallwood et al., 2012a, 2012b, 2011a). Although the capacity for SIT
allows us to perform goals based on long-term memory (Baird et al.,
2011), is associated with delayed gratiﬁcation, (Smallwood et al., in
press) enhances creativity (Baird et al., 2012), and consolidates
self-memories (Smallwood et al., 2011b, 2011c) its capacity to
monopolize attention with unrelated information means it can also
be the vehicle for absent-minded error (Barron et al., 2011; McVay
and Kane, 2009). Based on the current result we suggest that
absent-minded lapses do not necessarily depend upon speciﬁc neural
processes, but rather occur in moments when the mind conﬁgures men-
tal resources so as to perform an internal task that is incompatible with
current behavioral goals (Smallwood, forthcoming-a, forthcoming-b). In
this way our competence at perceptual decoupling comes with an asso-
ciated cost: the capacity to escape from the constraints of the here and
now facilitates the resolution of distant goals but does so at the detri-
ment of the integrity of actions performed in the present.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported by supported by grant R305A110277
from the US Ofﬁce of Education awarded to J.W. Schooler and
J. Smallwood.

References

Andrews-Hanna, J.R., 2011. The brain's default network and its adaptive role in internal

mentation. Neuroscientist.

Andrews-Hanna, J.R., Reidler, J.S., Sepulcre, J., Poulin, R., Buckner, R.L., 2010. Functional-

anatomic fractionation of the brain's default network. Neuron 65 (4), 550–562.

Antrobus, J.S., Coleman, R., Singer, J.L., 1967. Signal-detection performance by subjects

differing in predisposition to daydreaming. J. Consult. Psychol. 31 (5), 487–491.

Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Schooler, J.W., 2011. Back to the future: autobiographical plan-

ning and the functionality of mind-wandering. Conscious. Cogn.

Barron, E., Riby, L.M., Greer, J., Smallwood, J., 2011. Absorbed in thought: the effect of
mind wandering on the processing of relevant and irrelevant events. Psychol. Sci.
22 (5), 596–601.

Buckner, R.L., Andrews-Hanna, J.R., Schacter, D.L., 2008. The brain's default network:

anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1124, 1–38.

Christoff, K., Gordon, A.M., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., Schooler, J.W., 2009. Experience
sampling during fMRI reveals default network and executive system contributions
to mind wandering. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 (21), 8719–8724.

Fox, M.D., Snyder, A.Z., Vincent, J.L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D.C., Raichle, M.E., 2005.
The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional
networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 (27), 9673–9678.

Gerlach, K.D., Spreng, R.N., Gilmore, A.W., Schacter, D.L., 2011. Solving future problems:
default network and executive activity associated with goal-directed mental simu-
lations. NeuroImage 55 (4), 1816–1824.

Haggard, P., 2008. Human volition: towards a neuroscience of will. Nat. Neurosci.

934–946. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn2497.

Huijbers, W., Pennartz, C.M., Cabeza, R., Daselaar, S.M., 2009. When learning and re-

membering compete: a functional MRI study. PLoS Biol. 7 (1), e11.

Huijbers, W., Pennartz, C.M., Cabeza, R., Daselaar, S.M., 2011. The hippocampus is
coupled with the default network during memory retrieval but not during memory
encoding. PLoS One 6 (4), e17463.

Kahn, I., Andrews-Hanna, J.R., Vincent, J.L., Snyder, A.Z., Buckner, R.L., 2008. Distinct
cortical anatomy linked to subregions of the medial temporal lobe revealed by in-
trinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 100 (1), 129–139.

Kirschner, A., Kam, J.W., Handy, T.C., Ward, L.M., 2012. Differential synchronization in de-

fault and task-speciﬁc networks of the human brain. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6, 139.

Kleiner, M., Brainard, D., Pelli, D., 2007. What's new in Psychtoolbox-3? Perception 36

(ECVP Abstract Supplement).

Levine, B., Black, S.E., Cabeza, R., Sinden, M., McIntosh, A.R., Toth, J.P., Tulving, E., Stuss,
D.T., 1998. Episodic memory and the self in a case of isolated retrograde amnesia.
Brain 121, 1951–1973.

Mason, M.F., Norton, M.I., Van Horn, J.D., Wegner, D.M., Grafton, S.T., Macrae, C.N.,
2007. Wandering minds: the default network and stimulus-independent thought.
Science 315 (5810), 393–395.

McKiernan, K.A., Kaufman, J.N., Kucera-Thompson, J., Binder, J.R., 2003. A parametric
manipulation of factors affecting task-induced deactivation in functional neuroim-
aging. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 15 (3), 394–408.

McKiernan, K.A., D'Angelo, B.R., Kaufman, J.N., Binder, J.R., 2006. Interrupting the
“stream of consciousness”: an fMRI investigation. NeuroImage 29 (4), 1185–1191.
McVay, J.C., Kane, M.J., 2009. Conducting the train of thought: working memory capacity,
goal neglect, and mind wandering in an executive-control task. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn.
Mem. Cogn. 35 (1), 196–204.

Mitchell, J.P., 2009. Social psychology as a natural kind. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13 (6), 246–251.
Nichols, T., Brett, M., Andersson, J., Wager, T., Poline, J.B., 2005. Valid conjunction infer-
ence with the minimum statistic. NeuroImage 25 (3), 653–660. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.005 (15).

Pelli, D.G., 1997. The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: transforming

numbers into movies. Spat. Vis. 10, 437–442.

Ramnani, N., Owen, A.M., 2004. Anterior prefrontal cortex: insights into function from

anatomy and neuroimaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5 (3), 184–194.

Schacter, D.L., Addis, D.R., Buckner, R.L., 2007. Remembering the past to imagine the fu-

ture: the prospective brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8 (9), 657–661.

Schacter, D.L., Addis, D.R., Buckner, R.L., 2008. Episodic simulation of future events:

concepts, data, and applications. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1124, 39–60.

Schacter, D.L., Addis, D.R., Hassabis, D., Martin, V.C., Spreng, R.N., Spuznar, K.L., 2012.
imagining and the brain. Neuron 76,

The future of memory: remembering,
677–694. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.11.001.

Shadlen, M.N., Gold, J.L., 2004. The neurophysiology of decision making as a window on
cognition. In: Gazzaniga, M.S. (Ed.), The Cognitive Neurosciences III. MIT Press, pp.
1229–1243.

Smallwood, J., forthcoming. Distinguishing how from why the mind wanders: a

process-occurrence framework for self-generated thought. Psychol. Bull.

Smallwood, J., forthcoming. Searching for the elements of thought: a reply to Franklin,

Mrazek, Holloway and Schooler. Psychol. Bull.

Smallwood, J., Brown, K.S., Tipper, C., Giesbrecht, B., Franklin, M.S., Mrazek, M.D., et al.,
2011a. Pupillometric evidence for the decoupling of attention from perceptual
input during ofﬂine thought. PLoS One 6 (3), e18298.

Smallwood, J., Schooler, J.W., Turk, D.J., Cunningham, S.J., Burns, P., Macrae, C.N., 2011b.
Self-reﬂection and the temporal focus of the wandering mind. Conscious. Cogn. 20
(4), 1120–1126.

Smallwood, J., Schooler, J.W., Turk, D.J., Cunningham, S.J., Burns, P., Macrae, C.N., 2011c.

Self-reﬂection and the temporal focus of the wandering mind. Conscious. Cogn.

Smallwood, J., Brown, K., Baird, B., Schooler, J.W., 2012a. Cooperation between the de-
fault mode network and the frontal–parietal network in the production of an inter-
nal train of thought. Brain Res. 1428, 60–70.

Smallwood, J., Brown, K.S., Baird, B., Mrazek, M.D., Franklin, M.S., Schooler, J.W., 2012b.
Insulation for daydreams: a role for tonic norepinephrine in the facilitation of in-
ternally guided thought. PLoS One 7 (4), e33706.

Spreng, R.N., 2012. The fallacy of a “task-negative” network. Front. Psychol. 3, 145.
Spreng, R.N., Stevens, W.D., Chamberlain, J.P., Gilmore, A.W., Schacter, D.L., 2010. De-
fault network activity, coupled with the frontoparietal control network, supports
goal-directed cognition. NeuroImage 53 (1), 303–317.

Stawarczyk, D., Majerus, S., Maj, M., Van der Linden, M., D'Argembeau, A., 2011. Mind-
wandering: phenomenology and function as assessed with a novel experience
sampling method. Acta Psychol. 136 (3), 370–381.

Tulving, E., 1987. Multiple memory systems and consciousness. Hum. Neurobiol. 6 (2),

67–80.

Wagner, A.D., Shannon, B.J., Kahn, I., Buckner, R.L., 2005. Parietal lobe contributions to

episodic memory retrieval. Trends Cogn. Sci. 9 (9), 445–453.

Christoff, K., Ream, J.M., Gabrieli, J.D., 2004. Neural basis of spontaneous thought pro-

Weissman, D.H., Roberts, K.C., Visscher, K.M., Woldorff, M.G., 2006. The neural bases of

cesses. Cortex 40 (4–5), 623–630.

momentary lapses in attention. Nat. Neurosci. 9 (7), 971–978.

