The Journal of Neuroscience, February 19, 2014 • 34(8):2765–2767 • 2765

Journal Club

Editor’s Note: These short, critical reviews of recent papers in the Journal, written exclusively by graduate students or postdoctoral
fellows, are intended to summarize the important findings of the paper and provide additional insight and commentary. For more
information on the format and purpose of the Journal Club, please see http://www.jneurosci.org/misc/ifa_features.shtml.

Dissociable Neural Networks Supporting Metacognition for
Memory and Perception

Jane Garrison
Department of Psychology, and Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, CB2 3EB Cambridge, United Kingdom
Review of Baird et al.

Metacognition in its broadest sense refers
both to knowledge about our mental abil-
ities and to the regulatory processes by
which we might use that knowledge to
control cognition; for example, changing
how we perform a task if we feel our cur-
rent strategy is not optimal (Fernandez-
Duque et al., 2000). While there is debate
over the extent to which metacognition
relates to existing models of monitoring and
cognitive control, the term is generally ap-
plied to instances where self-knowledge is
either declarative (conscious) or based on
nonverbal feelings of uncertainty (Fleming
and Dolan, 2012).

This relationship between monitoring
and control processes is highlighted in
the influential Nelson and Narens (1994)
model of metacognition, which suggests a
separation between two key levels of reg-
ulatory processing: a personal “meta”
level that acts both to monitor and control
processing at the independent “object”
level via feedback (Fig. 1). So an example
of metacognitive regulation would be a
decision-making process where the choice
of an action can be made based on the
assessment of potential outcomes (an
object-level process), but which can also

Received Dec. 15, 2013; revised Jan. 14, 2014; accepted Jan. 15, 2014.

J.G. is supported by a graduate studentship from the Medical Research
Council, UK. I am very grateful to Dr Jon Simons for his helpful comments
and advice.

Correspondence should be addressed to Jane Garrison, Department of
Psychology, Downing Street, CB2 3EB Cambridge, UK. E-mail:
jrg60@cam.ac.uk.

DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5232-13.2014

Copyright © 2014 the authors

0270-6474/14/342765-03$15.00/0

be influenced by an awareness of the con-
fidence with which those outcomes have
been determined (a meta-level process).
Such a theoretical view of metacognition
sits neatly with the Norman and Shallice
(1986) model of executive function that
posits a similar higher-level system that
regulates object-level information (in this
case,
the allocation of attentional re-
sources to differing sensory and cognitive
demands) through a process of monitor-
ing and control. As with executive func-
tion, a link between the prefrontal cortex
(PFC) and metacognition is now well es-
tablished, with the anterior PFC (aPFC) in
particular seen as pivotal in underpinning
metacognitive ability (Fleming et al., 2012).
Metacognitive research has focused
predominantly on the processes involved
in self-knowledge and, in particular, the
confidence an individual has regarding
their performance on a particular task. In
a review of the neural basis of metacogni-
tive ability in memory and decision-
making, Fleming and Dolan (2012) found
that accuracy of such confidence judg-
ments dissociates from underlying task
performance and is highly variable across
individuals. Baird et al. (2013) use these
individual differences in their new study
to characterize the brain networks in-
volved in metacognitive knowledge dur-
ing perceptual and memory tasks.

The perceptual task used by Baird et al.
(2013) involved a simple two-choice vi-
sual discrimination test involving two
screens, each displaying six Gabor grat-
ings (small circular patches of alternating

dark and white lines). One of the screens
included a single grating that had been
oriented marginally away from the verti-
cal, which the participants were asked to
identify. In comparison, the memory task
required an old/new recognition decision
to be made about words that had been
included or not included on a previously
studied wordlist. For both tasks, partici-
pants were asked to make a six-point con-
fidence judgment immediately after each
test response. Using signal detection the-
ory (SDT), measures of metacognitive
accuracy were then calculated and com-
pared for the two tasks. Despite near-
identical mean levels of underlying
accuracy, the confidence scores for the
perceptual task were lower than for the
memory task, and no significant correla-
tion was found between the metacognitive
accuracy for each task and underlying task
performance. Together,
these findings
suggest that participants’ ability to judge
whether they had got the right answer was
unrelated to their performance on the un-
derlying task. Moreover, the accuracy of
confidence judgments was also uncorre-
lated across the memory and perceptual
tasks, suggesting a dissociation in meta-
cognitive ability between these two cogni-
tive domains.

To compare the neural networks in-
volved during metacognitive memory and
perceptual judgments, resting state func-
tional connectivity analysis was used to
relate the individual variability in confi-
dence accuracy to the connectivity be-
tween two regions of aPFC previously

2766 • J. Neurosci., February 19, 2014 • 34(8):2765–2767

Figure 1.
Nelson and Narens model of metacognition
(adapted with permission from Nelson and Narens, 1994).
The arrows show the flow of metacognitive information and
are broken to indicate that object-level processing can occur
in the presence or absence of meta-level monitoring and
control.

shown to be involved in metacognition:
lateral aPFC for perceptual decisions and
medial aPFC for mnemonic decisions.
Seed regions were defined in right lateral
and medial aPFC, their intrinsic connec-
tivity determined, and these connectivity
maps used to assess correlations with the
metacognitive data for the two tasks. Indi-
vidual differences in perceptual metacog-
nition were found to correlate with
connectivity (as measured by the strength
of correlated activity) between the lateral
aPFC seed region and clusters in the right
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
the left putamen, and a cluster that in-
cluded right putamen, right caudate, and
thalamus. For the memory task, the indi-
vidual difference variability correlated
with connectivity between the medial
aPFC and two clusters in the right parietal
cortex, in the central precuneus, and the
intraparietal sulcus (IPS)/inferior parietal
lobule (IPL).

There was a key practical difference be-
tween the tasks used in the Baird et al.
(2013) study. The perceptual task, but not
the memory task, was modulated to en-
sure a consistent accuracy level in under-
lying task performance, and different SDT
measures of metacognitive ability were
then used to compare the responses from
the two tasks (Aroc for the perceptual task
and Mratio for the memory task). Although
metacognitive accuracy was recalculated
for the perceptual task using the Mratio sta-
tistic, it is unclear whether the Mratio mea-
sure of metacognitive ability for the
perceptual task was also uncorrelated with
underlying task accuracy. However, the
Mratio statistic did confirm the lack of cor-
relation across individuals between per-
ceptual and mnemonic metacognitive
accuracy. This finding, together with the
differences found in the connectivity net-
works for the two tasks and the lack of

cross-correlation between the two networks
(individualdifferencesinperceptualmetacog-
nitive ability were uncorrelated with func-
tional connectivity from the medial aPFC
and vice versa) supports a dissociation
in the neural basis of metacognitive
knowledge for mnemonic and percep-
tual decisions.

Examining the structure of the mne-
monic and perceptual metacognitive
networks shows that these are largely con-
sistent with the different cognitive de-
mands associated with the two domains.
Baird et al. (2013) discuss how the percep-
tual network can be viewed as a real-time
monitor that integrates information over
short time-scales, and indeed this network
included regions of the striatum and ACC,
both linked with a role in monitoring task
performance. The present findings are
also consistent with recent evidence that
accurate perceptual metacognitive judg-
ments of performance depend on the in-
tegrity with which lateral aPFC integrates
performance monitoring
information
coded in ACC (Fleming and Dolan, 2012).
In contrast, mnemonic metacognitive
judgments are different, requiring the ap-
praisal of memory contents or the assess-
ment of relevant memory traces (Nelson
and Narens, 1990). The posterior regions
of the mnemonic metacognitive network
identified by Baird et al. (2013), parietal
structures including precuneus and IPS/
IPL, are highly interconnected with the
medial temporal lobe, a critical structure
in long-term memory encoding and stor-
age. Moreover, a role for the parietal lobe
in episodic memory has been suggested
based on functional imaging and neuro-
psychological findings, with recent re-
search indicating a role in the subjective
experience of memory (Simons et al.,
2010). However, whereas the mnemonic
metacognitive network found in the Baird
et al. (2013) study included right parietal
clusters, indications of parietal involve-
ment in episodic retrieval success are
more generally associated with left hemi-
spheric activations (Wagner et al., 2005).
Similarly, an investigation into the sub-
jective sense of memory strength found
that confidence in relating the gist of a
scene correlated with left rather than
right hemisphere lateral parietal activa-
tions (Qin et al., 2011). The significance
of this discrepancy regarding laterality is
unclear.

How do these findings inform our un-
derstanding of the neural basis of meta-
cognition? The Baird et al. (2013) study
identified brain regions on the basis of
correlations with individual differences in

Garrison • Journal Club

metacognitive ability, an approach that is
less likely to detect similarities in the net-
works. As such, the authors make clear
that a complete dissociation between the
mnemonic and perceptual networks can-
not be assumed, as there may be common
elements underpinning metacognitive
processes. Despite this caveat, the extent
of dissociation detected in the neural net-
works
supporting metacognitive pro-
cesses for memory and perception is most
consistent with a domain-specific version
of the Nelson and Narens model that as-
sumes separable metacognitive networks
associated with different cognitive abili-
ties (Nelson and Narens, 1994).

The networks revealed by Baird et al.
(2013) also reinforce a view in which the
meta-level of processing in the Nelson and
Narens model (Nelson and Narens, 1994)
maps to the anterior PFC and the object-
level maps to posterior brain regions, a
view consistent with Shimamura’s (2000)
dynamic filtering theory, which suggests
that the PFC monitors and regulates pos-
terior regions through a filtering or gating
mechanism. While it is easy to understand
the differences in the posterior networks
given the variable task demands, it is no-
table that the networks are also connected
to distinct regions of the aPFC, suggesting
that both meta-level and object-level pro-
cesses are domain-specific. Further evi-
dence for a separation of metacognitive
function within the PFC comes from ear-
lier work by Fleming and Dolan (2012),
who reviewed evidence for a dissociation
between retrospective and prospective
confidence judgments (those made before
and after the relevant task response),
which are supported by anterior and dor-
sal regions of lateral PFC and by medial
PFC, respectively. Such a dissociation in
prefrontal-cortical activity may simply be
organizational given the different connec-
tivity to posterior object-level networks,
or there may be inherent differences in the
meta-level representational requirements
relating to the different domains. How-
ever, such tight functional specialization
of monitoring functions in the PFC is
consistent with previous findings suggest-
ing fine-grained segregation of function
between adjacent but dissociable regions
of medial aPFC (Gilbert et al., 2010).

While the Baird et al. (2013) study pro-
vides a considerable advance in our un-
derstanding of metacognition at a neural
organization level, key questions remain
of how metacognitive self-knowledge
comes about and how mistakes are made.
Inherent curiosity to drive research for-
ward in these areas seems assured, given

Garrison • Journal Club

the importance of metacognition to our
sense of self and identity.

References
Baird B, Smallwood J, Gorgolewski KJ, Margulies
DS (2013) Medial and lateral networks in
anterior prefrontal cortex support metacogni-
tive ability for memory and perception. J Neu-
rosci 33:16657–16665. CrossRef Medline

Fernandez-Duque D, Baird JA, Posner MI (2000)
Executive attention and metacognitive regula-
tion. Conscious Cogn 9:288 –307. CrossRef
Medline

Fleming SM, Dolan RJ (2012) The neural basis
of metacognitive ability. Philos Trans R Soc
Lond B Biol Sci 367:1338 –1349. CrossRef
Medline

Fleming SM, Huijgen J, Dolan RJ (2012) Pre-
frontal contributions to metacognition in
perceptual decision making. J Neurosci 32:
6117– 6125. CrossRef Medline

Gilbert SJ, Henson RN, Simons JS (2010) The
scale of functional specialisation within hu-
man prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci 30:1233–
1237. CrossRef Medline

Nelson T, Narens L (1994) Why investigate
metacognition. In: Metacognition: knowing
about knowing (Metcalfe J, Shimamura AP,
eds.), pp 1–25. Cambridge MA: MIT.

Norman D, Shallice T (1986) Attention to ac-
tion: willed and automatic control of behav-
ior. In: Consciousness and self-regulation IV
(Davidson R, Schwartz R, Shapiro D, eds.), pp
1–18. New York: Plenum.

Qin S, van Marle HJ, Hermans EJ, Ferna´ndez

J. Neurosci., February 19, 2014 • 34(8):2765–2767 • 2767

G (2011) Subjective
sense of memory
strength and the objective amount of
information accurately remembered are re-
lated to distinct neural correlates at encod-
ing. J Neurosci 31:8920 – 8927. CrossRef
Medline

Shimamura AP (2000) Toward a cognitive neu-
roscience of metacognition. Conscious Cogn
9:313–323. CrossRef Medline

SimonsJS,PeersPV,MazuzYS,BerryhillME,OlsonIR
(2010) Dissociation between memory accuracy
and memory confidence following bilateral pari-
etal lesions. Cereb Cortex 20:479–485. CrossRef
Medline

Wagner AD, Shannon BJ, Kahn I, Buckner RL
(2005) Parietal lobe contributions to episodic
memory retrieval. Trends Cogn Sci 9:445–
453. CrossRef Medline

