Review

Ventromedial prefrontal-subcortical
systems and the generation of affective
meaning
Mathieu Roy1,2, Daphna Shohamy1 and Tor D. Wager2
1 Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
2 Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA

The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) comprises a
set of interconnected regions that integrate information
from affective sensory and social cues, long-term mem-
ory, and representations of the ‘self’. Alhough the vmPFC
is implicated in a variety of seemingly disparate process-
es, these processes are organized around a common
theme. The vmPFC is not necessary for affective
responses per se, but is critical when affective responses
are shaped by conceptual information about speciﬁc
outcomes. The vmPFC thus functions as a hub that links
concepts with brainstem systems capable of coordinat-
ing organism-wide emotional behavior, a process we
describe in terms of the generation of affective meaning,
and which could explain the common role played by the
vmPFC in a range of experimental paradigms.

Ventromedial prefrontal cortical involvement across
psychological domains
Over the past decade, neuroimaging studies have consis-
tently identiﬁed the human ventromedial prefrontal cortex
(vmPFC) as a key region for numerous and often seemingly
disparate functions, including autonomic and endocrine
regulation [1], emotion [2], emotion regulation [3], fear
conditioning and extinction [4], episodic and semantic
memory [5,6], prospection [5], economic valuation [7],
self-directed cognition [8], and mentalization about others
[9] (Figure 1). Conversely, dysfunction of the vmPFC is
thought to be critical in a number of brain disorders, most
notably post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) [10], de-
pression [11] and dysregulation related to chronic stress
[12] and pain [13].

Although this convergence is often brieﬂy acknowl-
edged, it remains unclear why these different functions
should overlap in the vmPFC and what its broad, under-
lying roles might be in the coordination of adaptive
behavior. It is tempting to attribute this functional di-
versity to the heterogeneity of the vmPFC itself, which
comprises several distinct cytoarchitectonic areas, span-
ning from the anterior cingulate cortex to the frontal pole.
However, the major subdivisions of the vmPFC are inter-
connected and are also connected with subcortical nuclei
in several interlocked functional systems [11], prompting
a number of researchers to characterize the region’s

Corresponding author: Wager, T.D.

(tor.wager@colorado.edu).

broad functional roles with terms such as ‘affect’ [14],
‘regulation’ [3], ‘valuation’ [7,15], ‘self-projection’ [5], ‘self-
reference’ [8], ‘mentalizing’ [9], ‘somatic markers’ [16],
‘visceromotor’ [11], and ‘default-mode’ because of its high
resting metabolism [17]. Although each of these charac-
terizations is extremely useful in providing a common
explanation to a broad range of vmPFC-related phenom-
ena, none of them seems to account for the range of
processes that involve the vmPFC, and many of these
broad views are difﬁcult to reconcile with animal studies
on the functional impairments resulting from vmPFC
damage or inactivation.

Here, we argue that the functional role of the vmPFC is
not reducible to any one of these functional categories.
Rather, it serves as a hub that connects systems involved in
episodic memory, representation of the affective qualities
of sensory events, social cognition, interoceptive signals,
and evolutionarily conserved affective physiological and
behavioral responses. As such, it plays a unique role in
representing conceptual information relevant for survival
and in transducing concepts into affective behavioral and
physiological responses. To conceptualize the organism in
context is to conceive the meaning of a situation (a partic-
ular constellation of environmental and internal cues) for
one’s physical and social well being and future prospects.
We argue that the vmPFC is essential for this class of
processes. Affective meaning is closely related to concepts
such as ‘affective appraisal’ [18], ‘situated conceptualiza-
tion’ [19], ‘valuation’ [7,15], and ‘goal-driven’ value learn-
ing [20]. However, we envision the construction of affective
meaning as involving a unique set of ‘ingredients’ that are
not necessarily involved in these other concepts, including
i) the construction of representations of a ‘situation’ (or
‘schema’) from precise conﬁgurations of cues; ii) the recall
of similar past situations and abstracting essential fea-
tures to guide prospection about potential future outcomes;
iii) the evaluation of potential outcomes that might beneﬁt
or harm the organism (‘self’); and iv) the triggering of
appropriate physiological and emotional responses, or
the modiﬁcation of ongoing ones. Thus, a meaning-cen-
tered view of vmPFC predicts that vmPFC and its subcor-
tical connections are not essential for simple forms of
affect, valuation, and affective learning, but are essential
when conceptual information drives affective physiological
and behavioral responses.

1364-6613/$ – see front matter ß 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2012.01.005 Trends in Cognitive Sciences, March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

147

Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

Autonomic/endocrine

Valuation

(a)

Sympathetic

(b)

Parasympathetic

Endocrine

(c)

(k)

Valued >
Devalued

A

(l)

Money,

trinkets, snacks

(m)

Expected value/

conceptual knowledge

(n)

x=0

(o)

Relative

value

Goal
value

(p)
Proximal > distal

rewards

(q)

Conceptually-driven

value

Memory/Self-projections

(r)

Theory of mind,
default mode,

autobiographical memory

(s)

Imagining future and
remembering past

(t)

Self-reflection >

baseline

Threat/threat regulation
(f)

Reappraisal/

(e)

(d)

Correlation with
conditioned SCRs

Placebo/
Extinction

Extinction/
regulation

of conditioned fear

(g)

(h)

(i)

Instructed

fear

Mediators of reappraisal

success

Opioids/Placebo

NAC/
sgACC

Cls

rdACC

(j)
Mediators of HR increases during social-evaluative threat

rdACC

***

0.18***

-0.05*

***

-0.13***

0.05*

vmPFC

Key:

Heart rate

Thal

z = -10
PAG

Speech

preparation

(SET)

Mood and anxiety disorders

(u)

(v)

(w)

Fear extinction recall

PTSD < controls

Hypo-and hyper-

activations in PTSD

Decreases in CBF during

depression

Positive relationship
Negative relationship

TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 

Figure 1. Convergence across fields: vmPFC activation across social, cognitive, affective, and clinical domains. (a) Dorsal anterior and mid cingulate activations reflecting
sympathetic activity during emotional/cognitive tasks and exercise [1]. (b) pgACC, sgACC and rostral mPFC activity correlations with parasympathetic/anti-sympathetic
activity. Top-left: negative correlation with increases in heart rate during a working memory task [90]. Bottom-left: decreases in skin conductance during relaxation [91].
Right: results from a meta analysis on brain activations associated with high-frequency heart rate variability during emotional and cognitive tasks (red:
emotional>cognitive; yellow: emotional = cognitive) [92]. (c) Left: stress-related correlates of natural killer (NK) cells increase [93]. Right: grief-evoking words correlates
with IL-6 [94]. (d) vmPFC and rdACC activity negatively and positively correlates with conditioned SCR during fear conditioning and reversal [4]; (e) vmPFC activation in
meta-analyses of fear extinction (red), placebo (green) and reappraisal (blue) [53]. (f) Left: vmPFC/sgACC activity during extinction recall [74]. Right: vmPFC/sgACC activity
(blue) during reappraisal of conditioned fear [52]. (g) rdACC activity in instructed fear paradigms [50]. (h) Positive (left: sgACC/Nacc) and negative (right: rdACC/amygdala)
mediators of successful reappraisal of negative emotions [54]. (i) Left: opioids activate mPFC [95]. Right: placebo activates a common sub-region in rACC [95]. (j) Positive
(rdACC, thalamus, PAG) and negative (vmPFC) mediators of heart rate increases during social evaluative threat [65]. (k) vmPFC/mOFC activation for valued vs. devalued
food [46]. (l) Common coding of value of money, trinkets and snacks [67]. (m) Left: integration of conceptual knowledge and value representations during decision-making.
Right: more rostral activity specific to explicit conceptual knowledge [78]. (n) Relative coding of value in the vmPFC [49]. (o) Goal value: healthiness of food for successful
dieters or taste of food for unsuccessful dieters [73]. (p) Temporal discounting of subjective value [72]. (q) Left: same odor labeled as ‘cheddar cheese’ vs ‘sweat’ [68]. Right:
same wine labeled as ‘cheap’ vs. ‘pricey’ [70]. (r) Convergence (red) of activations related to autobiographical memory (light blue), theory of mind (dark blue) and default-
mode network (green) [96]. (s) Activity related to imagining past or future events or remembering past events [97]. (t) Activity related to self-reflection [98]. (u) Reduced
activation during recall of extinction in PTSD patients vs. controls [38]. (v) Hypo- (blue) and hyper- (red) activations in response to aversive stimuli in PTSD patients vs.
controls [10]. (w) Reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF) in depressed patients vs. controls [79]. All panels reproduced with permission from the indicated sources.
Abbreviations: sgACC, subgenual anterior cingulate cortex; pgACC, perigenual anterior cingulate cortex; rACC, rostral ACC; rdACC, rostrodorsal anterior cingulate cortex;
mPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; vmPFC, ventromedial prefrontal cortex; mOFC, medial orbitofrontal cortex; Nacc, nucleus accumbens; PAG, periaqueductal gray matter;
SCR, skin conductance response; IL-6, interleukin - 6.

A system of systems: vmPFC bridges conceptual and
affective processes
In the past few years, it has become possible to integrate
human neuroimaging results across thousands of studies
[21], which now allows us to link broad classes of psycho-
logical processes with the functional brain networks that

underlie them. A recent database of nearly 4,400 studies,
called Neurosynth (www.neurosynth.org; [21]), permits
the construction of meta-analytic maps of consistent
activations across studies based on terms frequently used
in articles. One interesting feature of this approach is
that it allows the identiﬁcation of activations speciﬁcally

148

[
(
F
i
g
u
r
e
_
1
)
T
D
$
F
I
G
]
Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

associated with particular psychological domains, as spec-
iﬁed by a set of terms. For example, studies of ‘mentaliz-
ing’, a type of social cognition involving thinking about
others’ minds and intentions, can be deﬁned based on the
use of the words ‘empathy’ or ‘empathizing’, ‘theory of
mind’, ‘mentalizing’ or ‘mentalization’, and related terms.
We used Neurosynth to obtain maps of brain networks
speciﬁcally associated with functional tasks related to the
ingredients of affective meaning. These included maps of
studies related to memory and ‘default mode’ function, self-
reﬂection, social cognition and mentalizing, emotion, re-
ward, and autonomic and endocrine changes (Figure 2; see
Supplementary Data for details). We examined the rela-
tionships between these maps and the brain regions that
are commonly involved in all of these processes, thus
assessing which brain regions are likely to be essential
for integrating information across systems. We also com-
pared these maps with a map of experimental pain, which
is affective but not conceptually driven per se (that is, pain
does not always require the conceptual construction of
meaning to induce affect).

This comparison reveals striking overlap in vmPFC
across all of
the ‘meaning-related’ process domains
(Figure 2a), as well as functional specialization in different
parts of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and associated

regions. For instance, in addition to vmPFC, the ‘default
mode’ and ‘memory’ maps include the posterior cingulate
cortex (PCC), hippocampus and nearby medial temporal
regions, and the inferior parietal lobule. The ‘emotion’,
‘reward’, and ‘autonomic’ maps include the ventral striatum
and pallidum, amygdala, ventral tegmental area, periaque-
ductal gray (PAG), and parts of the insula and lateral
prefrontal cortex. The ‘self’ and ‘social cognition’ maps in-
clude both cortical features of the memory maps and sub-
cortical features of the emotion and reward maps, as well as
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (dmPFC) regions linked spe-
ciﬁcally with social cognition [9]. The ‘pain’ map is largely
distinct from the other maps, and includes multiple parts of
the ventromedial and cingulate cortices, including the
vmPFC, rostrodorsal anterior cingulate cortex (rdACC),
and the dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC), insula, and so-
matosensory cortices.

Identifying the boundaries of these zones and under-
standing their differential roles in affective processes across
species is an important and ongoing effort (Box 1). In
contrast to the vmPFC, the dACC has strong, direct ana-
tomical connections with motor areas and spinal motor
neurons [22] and is reliably engaged in cognitive control
processes, response selection, and affective and autonomic
functions linked to demands on skeletomotor action (Box 1;

(a) 

Default mode

Memory

Self

Social cognition/
Mentalizing

Emotion

Reward

Autonomic

Pain

(b) 

2
 
r
o
t
c
a
F

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Default mode

Memory

Self

Social cognition/
Mentalizing

Reward

Pain

Emotion

Autonomic/Endocrine

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Factor 1

Key:

Factor 1
Factor 2

TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 

Figure 2. A meta-analytic view: convergence of meaning-related processes in vmPFC. (a) Results of an automated reverse inference meta-analysis using Neurosynth. Color
maps display the probability terms related to vmPFC functions given observed activation (P termjactivation). (b) Results of a factor analysis with two factors on the meta-
analytic reverse inference patterns of activation for the terms ‘default mode’, ‘memory’, ‘self’, ‘social cognition/mentalizing’, ‘reward’, ‘autonomic/endocrine’, ‘emotion’ and
‘pain’. Top: factor loadings associated with each term. ‘Emotion’, ‘autonomic/endocrine’ and ‘reward’ strongly loaded on factor 1; ‘memory’ and ‘default mode’ strongly
loaded on factor 2; ‘self’ and ‘social cognition/mentalizing’ loaded on both factors; ‘pain’ did not substantially load on any factor. Bottom: spatial extent of the regions
associated with the two factors (including voxels with loadings in the top 1% of values across the brain). Factor 1 comprised a large ventrocaudal portion of the vmPFC,
subcortical structures (amygdala, striatum and midbrain), right insula and left lateral prefrontal cortex. Factor 2 comprised a more rostral and dorsal portion of the vmPFC,
the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and bilateral intraparietal sulcii (IPS). The specific searches that defined each category were as follows. In the list below, j, &, and 
indicate logical OR, AND, and NOT, respectively. * indicates a wildcard including all words beginning with the stem preceding the star. Default mode: ‘default j resting state
j dmn j default mode’. Memory: Average of ‘episod*’ ‘autobiograph*’ ‘retriev* j recollect*’. Self: ‘(self j subjective)’. Social cognition/mentalizing: ‘empath* j theory.of.mind j
tom j mentaliz* j trait j (inference & others)’. Emotion: ‘emotion* j mood j valence j arousal j affective’. Reward: ‘(reward* j monet* j gain j cocaine j eating j reinforc* j
incent* j love j joy j (positive & hedonic) j (positive & emotion) j (positive & affect)) & (negative & emotion)’. Autonomic/endocrine: ‘autonomic* j scr j hr j cortisol j
conductance j heart’. Pain: ‘pain* j noxious j nocicept*’. Additional details can be found in the Supplementary Data.

149

[
(
F
i
g
u
r
e
_
2
)
T
D
$
F
I
G
]
Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

Box 1. Subdivisions of ventromedial prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex

On a broad level, mPFC can be divided into ventromedial (vmPFC),
rostral dorsal cingulate (rdACC), and dorsal cingulate (dACC) zones
(Figure Ia) – corresponding to anterior cingulate, anterior midcingu-
late, and posterior midcingulate zones in Vogt and colleagues’ four-
region model
[85] – and the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex.
Neuroimaging is just beginning to weigh in on the precise
boundaries of these regions and their functional homologies across
species.

The dACC and vmPFC are strongly dissociable in human studies,
based on both activation and connectivity with other brain regions.
This is illustrated in Figure I by co-activation maps across the 1,669
studies included in this review (see Supplementary Data for details).
Typically, dACC activation co-occurs with activation in a lateral fronto-
parietal network, whereas vmPFC activations co-occur with activation
in a network consisting of medial and temporal cortex [17]. The rdACC
is connected to both networks with about equal strength, implying
that it may serve as a bridge between the vmPFC representation of
constructed ‘meaning’ and dorsal systems responsible for directing
action and attention. In addition, the rdACC co-activates particularly
strongly with a number of subcortical ‘affective’ structures (Figure Ib),
including the basolateral amygdala, nucleus accumbens, hypothala-
mus, periaqueductal gray (PAG), and dorsal raphe nucleus. This
connectivity suggests that, like the vmPFC, the rdACC is integral in
shaping subcortical responses and may participate in the construction
and deployment of ‘meaning’.

Even though we consider the vmPFC and the rdACC to be part of
the same functional zone at the broadest level, they are also clearly
dissociable. The rdACC and the vmPFC have different functional
profiles, paralleling a distinction between prelimbic (PL) and infra-
limbic (IL) cortices in rats (Figure Ic). The PL is associated with the
maintenance and recall of responses to aversive stimuli
[86]
(particularly when contextual information is important), whereas the
IL is associated principally with the extinction of aversive responses.
For example, PL stimulation impairs fear extinction and PL activity
after extinction predicts reduced extinction recall [87], whereas IL
activity has the opposite effects [87]. This reciprocal engagement of
the PL and IL in contextual representations of threat and safety
appears to be paralleled by similar findings in humans: the rdACC and
vmPFC show a preference for negative and positive emotion,
respectively [88] (Figure Id), and for sympathetic vs. parasympathetic
autonomic activity [1] (Figure 1a).

It is possible that this distinction is due to specialization by content
(positive vs. negative affect), process (response selection vs. value
updating), or something else. Recent evidence linking the PL and rdACC
to appetitive, drug seeking behavior [80] argues in favor of a process
account. One view is that the rdACC is involved in translating between
‘meaning’ and action systems (including selecting meaning-guided
actions under conditions of uncertainty [23,24] and monitoring the
consequences of actions [25]), whereas the vmPFC is primarily involved
in updating representations of the internal state of the organism.

(a)

rdACC

dmPFC

dACC

Co-activation maps

vmPFC

Key:

ACC

aMCC

pMCC

(b)

Amygdala

Dorsal raphe

(c)

Subdivisions of rat

MPFC

(d)

Valence effects in
human emotion

Nuc. accumbens

Ventral PAG

Hypothalamus

Dorsal PAG

dACC

PL

IL

Key:

Positive emotion

Negative emotion

TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences 

Figure I. Subdivisions and connectivity of the medial prefrontal cortex. (a) Four functionally distinct zones include the vmPFC, rdACC, dACC, and dmPFC. We
envision meaning construction as occurring principally in the vmPFC and rdACC, with substantial contributions from the dmPFC. To illustrate the differential
connectivity of the vmPFC and dACC zones, ‘seed’ regions were selected based on the peak activation frequencies across the 1,669 studies and 8 domain areas
summarized in this review. Areas significantly co-activated with each seed region are shown on the right (see Supplementary Data for details). The dACC (red) and
vmPFC (blue) regions co-activated with distinct brain networks. Additional subcortical connectivity with vmPFC was apparent below the stringent thresholds used
here (P < .05 corrected). rdACC (purple) showed co-activation with both networks, and particularly strong co-activation with periaqueductal gray (PAG) and other
subcortical areas. (b) Further exploration of medial prefrontal co-activation with subcortical regions. For each of the six areas shown, small ‘seed’ regions were
placed in the subcortical area, and co-activated areas in the medial prefrontal cortex are shown ( p < .0001). The rdACC is co-activated with each area, with particularly
strong co-activation with the dorsal PAG and raphe nuclei associated with active responses to threat, suggesting a possible homology with prelimbic cortex in rats.
(c) Location of prelimbic and infralimbic cortices in rats, adapted from [99]. (d) A meta-analytic summary of 138 PET and fMRI studies of positive and negative
emotional experience (374 experimental contrasts, selected from a database of 234 studies of emotion described in [88]). Colored regions indicate areas with
significantly greater density of activations related to positive (yellow) and negative (blue) emotional experience. Positive emotions more consistently activate the
vmPFC, posterior cingulate cortex, ventral striatum and supplementary motor areas, and pre-supplementary motor area. Negative emotions more consistently
activate the PAG, rdACC, dmPFC and deep cerebellar areas.

150

[
(
B
o
x
_
1
)
T
D
$
F
I
G
]
Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

for reviews, see [23,24]). Based on connectivity with other
brain areas, the vmPFC and dACC are distinct regions,
connected to different posterior and subcortical networks,
whereas the rdACC is a ‘transition zone’ with connectivity to
both networks (Box 1). Its function as a ‘transition zone’
perhaps confers on the rdACC a special role in translating
between affective meaning and action, including functions
such as error and outcome monitoring [25] and motivated
action. This could in part explain why the rdACC is more
frequently activated by aversive stimuli, such as pain and
fear cues, which are usually associated with a strong desire
to avoid or terminate an unpleasant experience. Interest-
ingly, although ‘pain’ as a category is associated with activi-
ty in all three zones, stimulus intensity is most strongly
linked to the dACC [26], pain experience to the rdACC [27],
and expectations about pain to the vmPFC [27].

A factor analysis of the eight domain maps that included
consistent vmPFC activity shows two distinct subsystems,
which also overlap only in the vmPFC (Figure 2b). The ﬁrst
subsystem encompasses the ventrocaudal vmPFC and sub-
cortical structures associated with affect, valuation, and
autonomic or endocrine control. This system might be called
the ‘affect generation’ system, as the ‘reward’, ‘autonomic’,
and ‘emotion’ maps load uniquely on this factor. The second
subsystem comprises the anterior and dorsal portion of the
vmPFC and the PCC. This might be called the ‘simulation’
subsystem for two reasons. First, the ‘memory’ and ‘default-
mode’ maps load uniquely on this factor. Second, this system
appears to be involved in constructing internal models of the
world based on mnemonic information and in using them to
imagine projected future scenarios [5]. The ‘self’ and ‘social
cognition and mentalizing’ maps were similar to one another
and loaded equally on both factors, which suggests that
these processes share features of both sub-systems. In this
sense, the vmPFC could be considered a ‘system of systems’,
binding together large-scale networks involved in memory
and projection, self-perception, social cognition, emotion,
reward, and autonomic and endocrine function.

The anatomical connectivity of the vmPFC parallels
these functional ﬁndings and reinforces the view of the
vmPFC as an integrative center. As has been reviewed
elsewhere [28,29], the vmPFC is unique among cortical
regions in that it projects directly to nuclei involved in affect
and peripheral regulation at all levels of the subcortical
neuraxis, including the hypothalamus, amygdala, ventral
striatum and pallidum, periaqueductal gray (PAG), para-
brachial complex, parapontine reticular formation, raphe
nuclei, nucleus tractus solitarius, and spinal autonomic
ganglia. These vmPFC-subcortical pathways are thought
to constitute a ‘visceromotor’ system, the functions of which
are to coordinate several aspects of autonomic activity [11].
The vmPFC is also directly connected with memory-related
circuits in the hippocampus and medial temporal lobe [11]
that can subserve both memory and future projection [5]. It
is also monosynaptically connected with cortical structures
associated with sensory hedonics and expectancies for spe-
ciﬁc rewards [15] (orbitofrontal cortex – OFC), mentalizing
and theory of mind [9] (dmPFC), and goal formation and
maintenance (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and frontopolar
cortex). Thus, the functional regions that are co-activated
with vmPFC in large-scale meta-analyses are also largely

monosynaptically connected with vmPFC. Moreover, the
pattern of connectivity suggests a unique integration of
information in systems involved in higher-level cognition
with those involved in the most basic forms of affective
experience and physiological regulation.

Several psychological constructs can be thought of as
emergent properties of such a system for integrating con-
ceptual and affective information, including ‘valuation’
[7,15], ‘goal-directed behavior’ [20] and ‘emotion’ [19,30].
Indeed, peripheral changes in response to environmental
threats and opportunities are central to what it means to
have an ‘emotional response’ [31]. However, the functional
properties of the systems connected to vmPFC suggest that
its function may not be reducible to these concepts. ‘Valu-
ation’, for instance, implies evaluation on a single dimen-
sion of valence (positive/negative or approach/avoid),
which serves as the basis for the construction of prefer-
ences. However, whereas affective value can be conceptu-
ally informed, it need not be: certain types of value do not
necessarily draw on memories and explicit representations
of the future. Conversely, value can be purely ‘cognitive’,
without requiring direct links to peripheral output systems
or the ‘organism-wide’ behavioral changes associated with
strong emotional responses. We argue that the function of
the vmPFC is not to reduce complex situations to a single,
actionable ‘value’ dimension, but rather to link situational
appraisals to speciﬁc patterns of behavioral and autonomic
responses afforded by the particular context. That is, the
role of the vmPFC may not be to determine how threaten-
ing or appetitive an object is, but rather to determine the
speciﬁc response (ﬁght, ﬂee, consume, protect, nurture,
rest) that is most adaptive given the particular situation.
The topography of vmPFC-PAG and vmPFC-hypothala-
mus connections, which are organized along the lines of
such adaptive behavioral responses, supports this view of
vmPFC function [29]. One prediction that follows from this
view is that, even if the vmPFC is damaged, value is still
estimated and motivated behavior occurs. However, value
and emotion are more ‘reﬂexive’ and not situation-appro-
priate, as occurs with ‘utilization behavior’ [32] and other
reports of orbital/ventromedial prefrontal damage [33].

A speciﬁc role for the vmPFC in learning and choice:
insights from animal lesion studies
The human neuroimaging results reviewed above reveal
the broad involvement of vmPFC across studies involving
memory, self-reference, emotion, affective value, and pe-
ripheral regulation. Studies in animals complement these
data by revealing a selective pattern of effects following
vmPFC lesions. These studies suggest that the vmPFC is
not necessary for basic forms of affective learning and
valuation, but is necessary to optimally guide behavior
when the meaning of events has to be inferred from par-
ticular conﬁgurations of situational cues.

Fear extinction recall. One paradigm that involves an-
ticipatory valuation is fear conditioning, in which sensory
cues (CS+) come to predict an aversive stimulus such as a
painful shock (UCS). The vmPFC is not required for the
learning or
expression of anticipatory conditioned
responses (CRs), including fear behavior [34]. For such
responses, a largely subcortical circuit linking sensory

151

Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

cortex, thalamus, amygdala, PAG, and brainstem is sufﬁ-
cient [35]. Nor is the vmPFC generally required for fear
extinction (but see [36]), in which cues are presented
without reinforcement and the CR diminishes over time
[34]. VMPFC is critical, however, for more complex forms of
learning. Lesions of the ventral part of rat vmPFC, the
infralimbic cortex (IL), cause enhanced recovery of fear a
day after extinction training [34]. These effects have typi-
cally been interpreted in terms of a deﬁcit in extinction
retrieval. Here, we propose that retrieval of extinction
memories requires inferring the meaning of the predictive
cue from a mental model of the task. During the ‘extinction
recall’ test, the rat must determine which of the two out-
comes the CS+ currently predicts (threat during initial
learning and safety during extinction), with impoverished
input as to which environmental cues are associated with
which context. This could entail a search for cues that are
informative of which context is now relevant through
memories rapidly formed in the hippocampus during pre-
vious phases [37]. One prediction that follows from this is
that overtraining on extinction should eliminate the need
for an intact vmPFC during retrieval.

Findings in animals are paralleled by human studies of
fear extinction and reversal, which show vmPFC and
hippocampal co-activation during the recall of extinction
[38], suggesting perhaps the involvement of explicit mem-
ory systems. In another recent human study [39], the
vmPFC responded more strongly to a safety cue (CS-) that
was previously a threat cue (CS+) than it did to the ‘naı¨ve’,
pre-reversal CS-. This effect is consistent with greater
demand on conceptual systems, which must rapidly and
ﬂexibly determine the current cue value post-reversal.

Stressor controllability. In this paradigm, one group of
rats experiences a series of shocks that can be terminated
with an instrumental response. Another group of rats
experiences an identical series of shocks, determined by
the behavior of the ﬁrst group, so that the external events
are matched but only the ﬁrst group experiences control.
Control speeds subsequent escape learning [40] and slows
subsequent fear conditioning [41], reduces threat-related
serotonin responses in the dorsal raphe to novel contexts
[40], and buffers the animals against later adverse effects
of inescapable shock [42]. VMPFC inactivation abolishes
all these beneﬁts of control without affecting the learning
of escape responses per se. Thus, the vmPFC is not neces-
sary for representing the aversive value of shocks or learn-
ing to escape them, but it is crucial
for integrating
information about the external environment and the efﬁ-
cacy of one’s actions – or, more simply, conceiving of the
meaning of the shocks in context.

Appetitive learning. A large literature on appetitive
learning also suggests that the mPFC-OFC system is
critical for representing the subjective value of the speciﬁc
outcomes associated with certain cues or actions [15].
Lesions of this system do not result in impairments in
responding to cues that are predictive of food rewards, nor
do they impair avoidance of a food that has been paired
with illness or satiated. However, the system is critical for
‘reinforcer devaluation’, a test in which two cues (Pavlovian
devaluation) or two actions (instrumental devaluation) are
associated with two foods, one of which is subsequently

152

devalued by satiation or pairing with illness. OFC/mPFC
lesions abolish the abrupt decrease in Pavlovian or instru-
mental responses associated with the now-devalued food
typically observed in normal animals.

One interpretation of these effects is that the devalued
cue or action is associated with two values: a positive value
learned pre-devaluation and an aversive value that is not
speciﬁcally linked to the cue or action through training and
must be inferred using conceptual or episodic systems [15].
This type of behavior is often cast in terms of ‘model-based’
(Pavlovian or instrumental devaluation) or ‘goal-directed’
behavior (instrumental devaluation only)
[20], which
implies the explicit representation of conceptual informa-
tion and is generally contrasted with ‘model-free’ decision
making behavior, which is more habitual and incremental
[43]. Following devaluation, the value of the action as
represented by the model-free, incremental value-learning
system remains high (the action was associated with tasty
rewards), but the value of the action represented by the
model-based system has changed.

Converging effects in a number of related paradigms
has led to the idea that the OFC-vmPFC system represents
expectations about speciﬁc outcomes [15,20], which per-
haps provides clues as to the roots of conceptual, prospec-
tive thought. While there may be important differences
between lateral OFC and vmPFC based on their anatomi-
cal status as ‘sensory association’ and ‘visceromotor’
regions, respectively [11], the two systems are intercon-
nected and function similarly in many respects. The lateral
OFC appears to be important for the assignment of value to
speciﬁc cues [15,44], whereas the vmPFC is more impor-
tant for the action value of those items [45], whether
behavioral, emotional, or visceromotor.

In humans, both regions track the diminished value of
outcomes following devaluation [46] (Figure 1k). More-
over, vmPFC lesions in humans and monkeys have been
shown to interfere with decision-making when the value
of alternative outcomes is close together [45,47], or
reverses rapidly [48], and is sensitive to the values of
all available choices, not only the best ones [45,49]
(Figure 1n). One explanation for these complex properties
is that the vmPFC is involved in integrating conceptual,
explicit representations of the potential outcomes into the
construction of value. Such conceptual
information,
which we predict draws on hippocampal memory sys-
tems, is particularly necessary when the values assigned
to stimuli and actions change rapidly or suddenly, mak-
ing slower habit-learning systems inadequate for optimal
behavior.

VMPFC involvement in conceptually driven affect in
humans
Given the ﬁndings discussed above, the vmPFC, and the
adjacent rdACC, should be particularly important for affec-
tive responses driven by conceptual appraisals. More spe-
ciﬁcally, the rdACC should be more active when there is
greater demand for immediate motivated behavior or action
monitoring, whereas the vmPFC should be more active
when it is necessary to update representations of the situa-
tional context itself. It is important to note, however, that
the action vs. context updating dichotomy is confounded

Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

with valence in the literature, leading to ambiguity on the
functional dissociations between these regions (see Box 1).
The effects of conceptual information are difﬁcult to
isolate in animal studies, but can be readily manipulated
in humans through language. For example, in instructed
fear paradigms, participants are informed through lan-
guage that a cue will be followed by a strong shock, which
is sufﬁcient to produce a well-characterized pattern of
increases in the amygdala and rdACC and decreases in
the vmPFC (both of which may be part of the broad
‘meaning construction’ response; see Box 1)
[50,51]
(Figure 1g). Conversely, instructions to conceptualize the
CS+ in an emotionally positive manner (e.g. think of a blue
square as a calming, peaceful ocean) increases vmPFC
activity and decreases amygdala and skin conductance
responses [52] (Figure 1f).

The vmPFC is important in several other paradigms
involving conceptually driven affect in humans. In reap-
praisal paradigms, participants are trained through lan-
guage to generate positive (or negative) conceptual frames
for aversive events. This conceptually-driven form of emo-
tion regulation was recently shown to consistently activate
the vmPFC in a meta-analysis of emotion regulation studies
[53] (Figure 1e). Moreover, these effects appear to be medi-
ated through the extensive connections between the vmPFC
and subcortical structures. In one recent study, positive
reappraisal reduced amygdala responses to aversive visual
images and increased activity in the ventral striatum, which
in turn predicted reappraisal effects on emotional experi-
ence [54] (Figure 1h). In this study, vmPFC activity was
associated with increased reappraisal success in a manner
mediated by changes in the ventral striatum. Nevertheless,
other dorsomedial and lateral prefrontal regions are likely
to be important as well [54,55]. One difﬁculty with reap-
praisal paradigms is that they require cognitive effort and
external attention [56,57], which produce large de-activa-
tions in the vmPFC across many paradigms [17]. The level of
vmPFC activity in functional MRI (fMRI) studies may de-
pend on the balance between meaning construction demand
and stimulus-focused processes [55]. That notwithstanding,
a prediction of the meaning-centered view is that reapprais-
al will be impaired with vmPFC lesions. A second prediction
is that reappraisal-related fMRI activity will emerge
when controlling for activity in lateral cortical ‘attention
systems’ (partially done in [54]; see Supplementary Data for
additional discussion).

Another example of the direct effects of conceptual
knowledge on the processing of affective stimuli is placebo
analgesia: the modiﬁcation of pain by belief in a treatment.
Studies of placebo analgesia show reliable activation
increases in the vmPFC [53] (Figure 1e) and reliable con-
nections between the vmPFC and PAG [58]. Some forms of
placebo analgesia require the presence of endogenous
opioids and correlated increases in endogenous opioid
activity are found in both structures under placebo treat-
ment [59] (Figure 1i). Although placebo studies often in-
volve conditioning procedures, these may often serve
primarily to alter expectations and the meaning of pain
in context [60,61]. In fact, a recent study found that vmPFC
activity was correlated with the strength of both expecta-
tions of analgesia and pain relief [62].

Finally, the social evaluative threat paradigm provides
converging evidence for vmPFC involvement in meaning-
driven emotion. In this paradigm, participants prepare a
speech on a personally relevant topic to be given in front of
a panel of ‘expert’ judges. The ‘active ingredients’ in this
challenge are conceptual (social feedback is provided that
threatens participants’ social and intellectual competence)
and powerful. Such procedures have elicited reliable auto-
nomic and endocrine responses in numerous studies [63].
In a pair of studies [64,65], speech preparation elicited
activity increases in dorsal vmPFC and dACC and
decreases in ventral vmPFC (Figure 1j). Both effects
tracked the individual time course of autonomic changes
during the challenge and the relationships between
vmPFC and autonomic changes were mediated in part
by activity in PAG. In another recent study, vmPFC dam-
age increased perceived threat and negative affect and
altered endocrine responses to this type of challenge [66].
These studies complement human studies of basic eco-
nomic value [67] (Figure 1l), which mix conceptual informa-
tion with other forms of learned value. An emerging view is
that activity in vmPFC, particularly the ventral and medial
orbitofrontal portion deactivated in stress studies, predicts
value after the integration of diverse kinds of conceptual
information. For example, the same odor produces larger
vmPFC activations when paired with the words ‘cheddar
cheese’, than when paired with the word ‘sweat’ [68]
(Figure 1q). Greater vmPFC activity is elicited in compar-
isons between ﬂavors labeled as ‘rich and delicious’ vs.
‘boiled vegetable water’ [69], wines labeled as expensive
vs. cheap [70], and skin creams presented as ‘rich and
moisturizing’ vs. ‘basic’ [71]. In addition, vmPFC responds
more strongly to more highly valued immediate rewards
than delayed ones [72] (Figure 1p). Finally, vmPFC activity
can also track the value of outcomes after integrating infor-
mation about long-term goals, such as the health value of
tasty, but diet-incompatible, foods [73] (Figure 1o). Taken
together, these results clearly show that representations in
the vmPFC are strongly inﬂuenced by various forms of
conceptual information and that vmPFC mediates processes
that extend beyond preferences, including physiological
responses related to well being.

VMPFC and meaning
The convergence of data presented here indicates a role for
the vmPFC in a class of functions. These functions cut
across traditional categories (e.g. value, affect), but are in
certain respects more speciﬁc than previous characteriza-
tions: they involve the infusion of conceptual information
into the generation of affective responses. The critical
process is one of combining elemental units of information
– from sensory systems,
long-term
memory – into a gestalt representation of how an organism
is situated in its environment, which then drives predic-
tions about future events. A straightforward term for such
processes is ‘affective meaning’: a sense of the signiﬁcance
of events for an organism’s well being and future prospects.
The value of constructing meaning for the organism
is that it allows mental representations to be ﬂexible,
constructive, and future-oriented, and to depend on the
anticipated interaction between the organism and the

interoceptive cues,

153

Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

environment rather than superﬁcial cues. A principal chal-
lenge in navigating the world is that the relationships
between sensory cues and the interactions they imply are
often complex. A smile is pleasant coming from a friend, but
may signal danger coming from a competitor. The phrase
‘great job’ can signal pride, jealousy, or disdain, depending
on the context in which it is uttered. We are constantly faced
with the need to make inferences by generalizing from past
situations, without the beneﬁt of trial-and-error learning, as
there are seldom second chances to avoid major threats or
capitalize on unique opportunities.

A ‘meaning-centered’ view of vmPFC function is closely
aligned with recent views of the orbital-medial prefrontal
system as involved in ‘goal-directed’ or ‘model-based’ learn-
ing [43], representing expectancies about speciﬁc outcomes
[15], retrieving fear inhibitory memories [74], or generating
subjective value and emotion based on conceptual informa-
tion [19]. We do not intend for ‘meaning’ to replace these
other terms as a label for this system’s function, but rather
complement them and provide a broader framework that
integrates ﬁndings across animal and human studies.
Thinking of vmPFC functions in terms of meaning rather
than more basic concepts such as affect, value, memory, or
visceromotor control also helps to explain its role in more
complex processes not reviewed in depth here, such as
‘courage’ [75], ‘closeness’ [76], ‘social standing’ [77] and
‘the emergence of concepts’ [78] (Figure 1m). This view also
affords some new predictions. The vmPFC should be critical
for emotion to the degree that it is elicited by conceptual
information; for learning to the degree that ‘model-based’
learning is required [43]; for autonomic and endocrine
responses if they are driven by abstract information and
verbal communication; for decision-making when the space
of options is under-constrained and strong priors are advan-
tageous; and for value if it is derived from knowledge about
the underlying properties of valued items.

This view also has implications for disorders that in-
volve the vmPFC, which by no coincidence may involve a
breakdown in ﬂexible meaning generation. Dysfunction of
the vmPFC is thought to be critical in anxiety disorders
such as PTSD [10]
(Figure 1uv), depression [79]
(Figure 1w), counterproductive motivation in drug addic-
tion [80], and dysregulation of autonomic and endocrine
systems related to chronic stress [12] and pain [13]. The
structural or functional abnormalities observed in these
conditions are typically accompanied by hypo- or hyper-
reactivity
threat
responses [10] (Figure 1v), which suggests that these dis-
orders might be exacerbated by a reduced capacity to
appropriately assign affective meaning to sensory and
internal cues. Depression, for example, is characterized
by biases towards negative information and rumination
[81] and PTSD by over-generalization of threat cues [82].
Cognitive-behavioral therapy and other forms of meaning-
centered therapy [83] target these pathological interpreta-
tions of the self and the world by breaking them down, and
are thought to be effective for all these disorders.

in subcortical

circuits

triggering

Concluding remarks
To summarize, building on extensive data regarding the
role of vmPFC in subjective value, affect, memory and

154

visceromotor control, we propose that meaning-guided
affect as represented in the vmPFC is i) generative and
can be easily transferred to new situations or conﬁgura-
tions of informational elements; ii) shows sensitive depen-
dence on the precise conﬁguration of elements, but not to
incidental variations in sensory appearance; and iii) can
change rapidly during learning. This view of affective
meaning is closely aligned with the idea that ‘affective
appraisal’ and ‘situated conceptualization’ [84] are critical
emotion-generating processes, as well as with other dual-
process views which suggest that ‘model-based’ or ‘goal-
directed’ systems operate alongside simpler habit-learning
systems to guide reward-driven learning in animals
[20,43]. Unlike simpler forms of learning and valuation,
affective meaning arises from the fast recombination
of conceptual information extracted from long-term mem-
ory into predictive models of the self in context, which
drive both decision-making and physiological affective
responses. This highly integrative process appears to rely
on the vmPFC, which binds together large-scale networks
involved in several functions that are necessary to con-
struct affective meaning: memory and future projection,
self-perception, social cognition, emotion, reward, and au-
tonomic and endocrine function. Although much remains
to be learned about how these different functions combine
and interact in the vmPFC (see also Box 2), we believe that
considering these different functions in the broader context

Box 2. Questions for future research

 The inherently constructive nature of vmPFC processes seems to
rely on the extensive connections between this region and a
number of cortical and sub-cortical structures. However, ‘mean-
ing’ is likely to reflect a class of processes rather than a unitary
process. Are there different kinds of ‘meaning’ and are they
associated with different patterns of connectivity? Future brain
imaging research should explore the specific patterns of vmPFC
connectivity associated with different types of tasks that bear on
‘meaning’.

 The effects of vmPFC activations on subcortical circuits appear to
be predominantly inhibitory.
Is the inhibition of subcortical
responses intrinsically tied to the higher adaptive value of
affective meaning, which automatically competes with responses
generated at subcortical
levels, or can the vmPFC sometimes
prime and act synergistically with subcortical structures?

 Activity in the vmPFC is inversely correlated with activity in the
rdACC across a variety of emotional and decision-making tasks.
What drives this inverse correlation? Is it valence (content) or
demand on action and attention systems (process) [80]? Are both
regions reciprocally inhibitory or does activity in one of the two
regions have precedence over the other?

 Psychiatric disorders characterized by emotional dysregulation
are consistently associated with structural and functional abnorm-
alities in the vmPFC. These disorders are also often associated
with several neurocognitive deficits and are frequently comorbid
with other clinical and personality disorders. How can these
comorbidities be explained by the broader integrative role of
cognitive, emotional and self-related processes of the vmPFC and
can this role help improve psychiatric nosologies?

 How is the developmental trajectory of vmPFC structure and
connections related to the development of
the capacity to
construct affective meaning [89] and how is it influenced by
favorable and unfavorable early life experiences? What are the
effects of prefrontal morphological and functional changes
associated with aging on flexible meaning generation in older
adults?

Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

of affective meaning will help further our understanding of
the role of vmPFC in each of these separate functions.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Lisa Feldman Barrett, Richard Lane, Steve
Maier, Antonio Rangel, and Geoff Schoenbaum for helpful comments and
discussion of this manuscript, and Tal Yarkoni for assistance with the
Neurosynth database. This work was funded by NIDA 1RC1DA028608
(T.D.W.), R01 MH076136 (T.D.W.), and R01DA027794 (T.D.W and D.S.),
and by a post-doctoral scholarship from the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research grant (CIHR) to M.R. Matlab code implementing all analyses is
available at: http://wagerlab.colorado.ed.

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can
be found,
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.tics.
2012.01.005.

References
1 Critchley, H.D. et al. (2011) Dissecting axes of autonomic control in
humans: insights from neuroimaging. Auton. Neurosci. Basic Clin. 161,
34–42

2 Wager, T. et al. (2008) The neuroimaging of emotion, In Handbook of
Emotions (3rd edn) (Lewis, M. et al., eds), pp. 249–271, The Guilford
Press

3 Etkin, A. et al. (2011) Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and

medial prefrontal cortex. Trends Cogn. Sci. 15, 85–93

4 Schiller, D. and Delgado, M.R. (2010) Overlapping neural systems
mediating extinction, reversal and regulation of fear. Trends Cogn.
Sci. 14, 268–276

5 Buckner, R.L. and Carroll, D.C. (2007) Self-projection and the brain.

Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 49–57

6 Binder, J.R. et al. (2009) Where is the semantic system? A critical
review and meta-analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies.
Cereb. Cortex 19, 2767–2796

7 Rangel, A. and Hare, T. (2010) Neural computations associated with

goal-directed choice. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 262–270

8 Northoff, G. and Bermpohl, F. (2004) Cortical midline structures and

the self. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 102–107

9 Amodio, D.M. and Frith, C.D. (2006) Meeting of minds: the medial

frontal cortex and social cognition. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 268–277

10 Etkin, A. and Wager, T.D. (2007) Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a
meta-analysis of emotional processing in PTSD, social anxiety
disorder, and speciﬁc phobia. Am. J. Psychiatry 164, 1476–1488

11 Price, J.L. and Drevets, W.C. (2010) Neurocircuitry of mood disorders.

Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 192–216

12 Lane, R.D. and Wager, T.D. (2009) The new ﬁeld of Brain–Body
Medicine: What have we learned and where are we headed?
Neuroimage 47, 1135–1140

13 Apkarian, A.V. et al. (2011) Pain and the brain: speciﬁcity and

plasticity of the brain in clinical chronic pain. Pain 152, S49–S64

14 Bush, G. et al. (2000) Cognitive and emotional inﬂuences in anterior

cingulate cortex. Trends Cogn. Sci. 4, 215–222

15 Schoenbaum, G. et al. (2011) Does the orbitofrontal cortex signal value?

Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1239, 87–99

16 Damasio, A. (1996) The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible
functions of the prefrontal cortex. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B: Biol.
Sci. 351, 1413–1420

17 Raichle, M. et al. (2001) A default mode of brain function. Proc. Natl.

Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 676–682

18 Scherer, K.R. (2001) Appraisal considered as a process of multi-level
sequential checking. In Appraisal Processes in Emotion: Theory,
Methods, Research (Scherer, K.R. et al., eds), pp. 92–120, Oxford
University Press

19 Barrett, L.F. (2006) Solving the emotion paradox: categorization and

the experience of emotion. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 10, 20–46

20 Balleine, B.W. and O’Doherty, J.P.

(2010) Human and rodent
homologies in action control: corticostriatal determinants of goal-
directed and habitual action. Neuropsychopharmacology 35, 48–69

21 Yarkoni, T. et al. (2011) Large-scale automated synthesis of human

functional neuroimaging data. Nat. Methods 8, 665–670

22 Picard, N. and Strick, P. (2001) Imaging the premotor areas. Curr.

Opin. Neurobiol. 11, 663–672

23 Shackman, A.J. et al. (2011) The integration of negative affect, pain
and cognitive control in the cingulate cortex. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 12,
154–167

24 Van Snellenberg, J. and Wager, T.D. (2009) Cognitive and motivational
functions of the human prefrontal cortex. In Luria’s Legacy in the 21st
Century (Christensen, A.L. et al., eds), pp. 30–61, Oxford University
Press

25 Rushworth, M.F.S. et al. (2011) Frontal cortex and reward-guided

learning and decision-making. Neuron 70, 1054–1069

26 Coghill, R. et al. (1999) Pain intensity processing within the human
brain: a bilateral, distributed mechanism. J. Neurophysiol. 82, 1934–
1943

27 Atlas, L.Y. et al. (2010) Brain mediators of predictive cue effects on

perceived pain. J. Neurosci. 30, 12964–12977

28 Price, J.L. (2007) Deﬁnition of the orbital cortex in relation to speciﬁc
connections with limbic and visceral structures and other cortical
regions. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1121, 54–71

29 Bandler, R. et al.

(2000) Central circuits mediating patterned
autonomic activity during active vs. passive emotional coping. Brain
Res. Bull. 53, 95–104

30 Cacioppo, J. and Gardner, W. (1999) Emotion. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 50,

191–214

31 Cacioppo, J. et al. (1992) Relationship between facial expressiveness
and sympathetic activation in emotion: a critical review, with emphasis
on modeling underlying mechanisms and individual differences. J.
Pers. Soc. Psychol. 62, 110–124

32 Lhermitte, F. (1983) ‘Utilization behaviour’ and its relation to lesions of

the frontal lobes. Brain 106, 237–255

33 Beer, J. et al.

(2006) Orbitofrontal cortex and social behavior:
integrating self-monitoring and emotion-cognition interactions. J.
Cogn. Neurosci. 18, 871–879

34 Quirk, G.J. et al. (2000) The role of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in

the recovery of extinguished fear. J. Neurosci. 20, 6225–6231

35 LeDoux, J. et al. (1984) Subcortical efferent projections of the medial
geniculate nucleus mediate emotional responses conditioned to
acoustic stimuli. J. Neurosci. 4, 683–698

36 Sierra-Mercado, D. et al.

(2010) Dissociable roles of prelimbic
and infralimbic cortices, ventral hippocampus, and basolateral
amygdala in the expression and extinction of conditioned fear.
Neuropsychopharmacology 36, 529–538

37 Hugues, S. and Garcia, R. (2007) Reorganization of learning-associated
prefrontal synaptic plasticity between the recall of recent and remote
fear extinction memory. Learn. Mem. 14, 520–524

38 Milad, M.R. et al. (2009) Neurobiological basis of failure to recall
extinction memory in posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychiatry
66, 1075–1082

39 Schiller, D. et al. (2008) From fear to safety and back: reversal of fear in

the human brain. J. Neurosci. 28, 11517–11525

40 Amat, J. et al. (2005) Medial prefrontal cortex determines how stressor
controllability affects behavior and dorsal raphe nucleus. Nat.
Neurosci. 8, 365–371

41 Baratta, M.V. et al. (2008) Role of the ventral medial prefrontal cortex
in mediating behavioral control-induced reduction of later conditioned
fear. Learn. Mem. 15, 84–87

42 Maier, S.F. and Watkins, L.R. (2010) Role of the medial prefrontal

cortex in coping and resilience. Brain Res. 1355, 52–60

43 Daw, N.D. et al.

(2005) Uncertainty-based competition between
prefrontal and dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control.
Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1704–1711

44 Walton, M.E. et al. (2010) Separable learning systems in the macaque
brain and the role of orbitofrontal cortex in contingent learning.
Neuron 65, 927–939

45 Noonan, M.P. et al. (2010) Separate value comparison and learning
mechanisms in macaque medial and lateral orbitofrontal cortex. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 20547–20552

46 Valentin, V.V. et al. (2007) Determining the neural substrates of
goal-directed learning in the human brain. J. Neurosci. 27, 4019–
4026

47 Tsuchida, A. et al. (2010) Beyond reversal: a critical role for human
orbitofrontal cortex in ﬂexible learning from probabilistic feedback.
J. Neurosci. 30, 16868–16875

155

Review

Trends in Cognitive Sciences March 2012, Vol. 16, No. 3

48 Fellows, L. and Farah, M. (2003) Ventromedial frontal cortex mediates
learning

affective shifting in humans: evidence from a reversal
paradigm. Brain 126, 1830–1837

49 Boorman, E.D. et al. (2009) How green is the grass on the other side?
Frontopolar cortex and the evidence in favor of alternative courses of
action. Neuron 62, 733–743

50 Mechias, M-L. et al. (2010) A meta-analysis of instructed fear studies:
implications for conscious appraisal of threat. Neuroimage 49, 1760–
1768

51 Phelps, E.A. et al. (2004) Extinction learning in humans: role of the

amygdala and vmPFC. Neuron 43, 897–905

52 Delgado, M.R. et al. (2008) Neural circuitry underlying the regulation
of conditioned fear and its relation to extinction. Neuron 59, 829–838
53 Diekhof, E.K. et al. (2011) Fear is only as deep as the mind allows.

Neuroimage 58, 275–285

74 Milad, M.R. et al. (2007) Recall of fear extinction in humans activates
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus in concert. Biol.
Psychiatry 62, 446–454

75 Nili, U. et al. (2010) Fear thou not: activity of frontal and temporal

circuits in moments of real-life courage. Neuron 66, 949–962

76 Krienen, F.M. et al. (2010) Clan mentality: evidence that the medial
prefrontal cortex responds to close others. J. Neurosci. 30, 13906–13915
77 Gianaros, P.J. et al. (2007) Perigenual anterior cingulate morphology
covaries with perceived social standing. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 2,
161–173

78 Kumaran, D. et al. (2009) Tracking the emergence of conceptual

knowledge during human decision making. Neuron 63, 889–901

79 Drevets, W. et al. (1997) Subgenual prefrontal cortex abnormalities in

mood disorders. Nature 386, 824–827

80 Peters, J. et al. (2009) Extinction circuits for fear and addiction overlap

54 Wager, T.D. et al. (2008) Prefrontal-subcortical pathways mediating

in prefrontal cortex. Learn. Mem. 16, 279–288

successful emotion regulation. Neuron 59, 1037–1050

55 Ochsner, K.N. et al. (2004) Reﬂecting upon feelings: an fMRI study of
neural systems supporting the attribution of emotion to self and other.
J. Cogn. Neurosci. 16, 1–27

56 Urry, H.L. et al. (2009) Individual differences in some (but not all)
medial prefrontal regions reﬂect cognitive demand while regulating
unpleasant emotion. Neuroimage 47, 852–863

57 van Reekum, C.M. et al. (2007) Gaze ﬁxations predict brain activation
during the voluntary regulation of picture-induced negative affect.
Neuroimage 36, 1041–1055

58 Meissner, K. et al. (2011) The placebo effect: advances from different

methodological approaches. J. Neurosci. 31, 16117–16124

59 Wager, T.D. et al. (2007) Placebo effects on human m-opioid activity

during pain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 11056–11061

60 Benedetti, F. et al. (2003) Conscious expectation and unconscious
Conditioning in analgesic, motor, and hormonal placebo/nocebo
responses. J. Neurosci. 23, 4315–4323

81 McLaughlin, K.A. and Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2011) Rumination as a
transdiagnostic factor in depression and anxiety. Behav. Res. Ther. 49,
186–193

82 Lissek, S. et al. (2005) Classical fear conditioning in the anxiety

disorders: a meta-analysis. Behav. Res. Ther. 43, 1391–1424

83 Ellis, A. and Joffe Ellis, D., eds (2011) Rational Emotive Behavior

Therapy, American Psychological Association

84 Barsalou, L.W. (2008) Grounded Cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 59,

617–645

85 Palomero-Gallagher, N. et al. (2009) Receptor architecture of human
cingulate cortex: Evaluation of the four-region neurobiological model.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 30, 2336–2355

86 Oswald, B.B. et al. (2010) Encoding and retrieval are differentially
processed by the anterior cingulate and prelimbic cortices: a study
based on trace eyeblink conditioning in the rabbit. Neurobiol. Learn.
Mem. 93, 37–45

87 Sotres-Bayon, F. and Quirk, G.J. (2010) Prefrontal control of fear: more

61 Montgomery, G.H. and Kirsch, I. (1997) Classical conditioning and the

than just extinction. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 231–235

placebo effect. Pain 72, 107–113

88 Lindquist, K. et al. The brain basis of emotion: a meta-analytic review.

Behav. Brain Sci. (in press)

89 Blakemore, S-J. (2011) Imaging brain development: the adolescent

brain. NeuroImage DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.080

90 Gianaros, P.J. et al. (2004) Regional cerebral blood ﬂow correlates with
heart period and high-frequency heart period variability during
working-memory tasks: implications for the cortical and subcortical
regulation of cardiac autonomic activity. Psychophysiology 41, 521–530
91 Nagai, Y. et al. (2004) Activity in ventromedial prefrontal cortex
covaries with sympathetic skin conductance level: a physiological
account of a ‘default mode’ of brain function. Neuroimage 22, 243–251
92 Thayer, J.F. et al. (2012) A meta-analysis of heart rate variability and
neuroimaging studies: implications for heart rate variability as a
marker of stress and health. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 747–756

93 Ohira, H. et al. (2009) Regulation of natural killer cell redistribution by
prefrontal cortex during stochastic learning. Neuroimage 47, 897–907
94 O’Connor, M-F. et al. (2009) When grief heats up: pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines predict regional brain activation. Neuroimage 47, 891–896
95 Petrovic, P. (2002) Placebo and opioid analgesia: imaging a shared

neuronal network. Science 295, 1737–1740

96 Spreng, R.N. et al. (2008) The common neural basis of autobiographical
memory, prospection, navigation, theory of mind and the default mode:
a quantitative meta-analysis. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 21, 489–510

97 Addis, D.R. et al. (2009) Constructive episodic simulation of the future
and the past: distinct subsystems of a core brain network mediate
imagining and remembering. Neuropsychologia 47, 2222–2238

98 van der Meer, L. et al. (2010) Self-reﬂection and the brain: a theoretical
review and meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies with implications
for schizophrenia. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 34, 935–946

99 Gabbott, P.L.A. et al. (2005) Prefrontal cortex in the rat: projections to
subcortical autonomic, motor, and limbic centers. J. Comp. Neurol. 492,
1–33

62 Wager, T.D. et al. (2011) Predicting individual differences in placebo
analgesia: contributions of brain activity during anticipation and pain
experience. J. Neurosci. 31, 439–452

63 Dickerson, S. et al. (2004) When the social self is threatened: shame,

physiology, and health. J. Pers. 72, 1191–1216

64 Wager, T.D. et al. (2009) Brain mediators of cardiovascular responses

to social threat. Neuroimage 47, 821–835

65 Wager, T.D. et al. (2009) Brain mediators of cardiovascular responses
II: prefrontal-subcortical pathways and

to social
relationship with anxiety. Neuroimage 47, 836–851

threat, Part

66 Buchanan, T.W. et al. (2010) Medial prefrontal cortex damage affects
physiological and psychological stress responses differently in men and
women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35, 56–66

67 Chib, V.S. et al. (2009) Evidence for a common representation of
in human ventromedial

decision values
prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 29, 12315–12320

for dissimilar goods

68 de Araujo, I.E. et al.

(2005) Cognitive modulation of olfactory

processing. Neuron 46, 671–679

69 Grabenhorst, F. et al.

(2007) How cognition modulates affective
responses to taste and ﬂavor: top-down inﬂuences on the orbitofrontal
and pregenual cingulate cortices. Cereb. Cortex 18, 1549–1559

70 Plassmann, H. et al. (2008) Marketing actions can modulate neural
representations of experienced pleasantness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 105, 1050–1054

71 McCabe, C. et al.

(2008) Cognitive inﬂuences on the affective
representation of touch and the sight of touch in the human brain.
Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 3, 97–108

72 McClure, S.M. (2004) Separate neural systems value immediate and

delayed monetary rewards. Science 306, 503–507

73 Hare, T.A. et al.

(2009) Self-control

in decision-making involves

modulation of the vmPFC valuation system. Science 324, 646–648

156

